The Project Gutenberg eBook of At the Emperor's Wish: A Tale of the New
Japan, by Oscar King Davis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: At the Emperor's Wish: A Tale of the New Japan

Author: Oscar King Davis

Release Date: September 11, 2021 [eBook #66274]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Mary Glenn Krause and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AT THE EMPEROR'S WISH: A TALE OF
THE NEW JAPAN ***





[Illustration: _At the Emperor’s Wish_]




[Illustration: She was wonderfully beautiful.]




[Illustration:

    _At the Emperor’s Wish_
    _A Tale of the New Japan_

    _By
    Oscar King Davis_

    _D. Appleton and Company_
    _New York_
    _1905_]

[Illustration:

    COPYRIGHT, 1905, BY
    D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

    _Published October, 1905_]




[Illustration]




TO THE REAL SOICHIS

    _Who, by tens and hundreds of thousands, from all the
    corners of Dai Nippon, great and small, shizoku
    and heimin, with a simplicity, a courage and a
    faith that may well stand as models for all
    the world, and a passion of loyalty passing
    occidental understanding, await
    only the occasion to demonstrate
    their glad, unselfish
    readiness to meet the
    Emperor’s Wish_

    O. K. D.




[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_List of Illustrations_


                                            FACING PAGE

    She was wonderfully beautiful         _Frontispiece_

    Hurled the Samurai boy bodily over his head      44

    He saw dimly a dark figure                      120

    “Banzai!”                                       140




[Illustration]




_At the Emperor’s Wish_




[Illustration]




I


Far out toward the end of Lower Timber Street, where incurious visitors
to the city seldom stray, stands the house of Kudo Jukichi. It is called
Lower Timber Street, the Upper end being down in the city where once the
stout castle of the Lord of the Clan was the center of all the life of
the place. But the name is falsely descriptive, for it leads straight up
to the beautiful hills, and ends abruptly in a sheer climb to the top of
the pine-clad cone where nestles a famous old Shinto shrine. The narrow
path that winds up the steep hillside has been beaten smooth by thousands
of pious feet. Below, curving down in gentle slopes, the verdure-covered
hills ring in the town, and beyond the billowing roofs of blue-gray
thatch and tile stretches the shining, island-dotted sea, warm and soft
in the enormous blaze of summer.

To the casual observer there is nothing about the house of Kudo Jukichi
to indicate the quality of those who dwell within. A dilapidated
fence of split bamboos, that once was tall and fine, partly conceals
the weather-beaten little structure and partly reveals it, with the
tantalizing indistinctness of a veil over a beautiful face. If a curious
stranger should stop and peer through the lattice-like breaks in the
fence he would gaze upon wood-work grown soft and gray with age and the
flagellation of rains. Even the tiles of the roof, laid with a care
cognizant of earthquake and bitter storm, seem to have lost patience and
outgrown their pride, and now to await only the semblance of opportunity
to loose their hold and slide down. The shrubs along the narrow path that
leads from the gate are all unkempt and ragged, and the lone plum-tree
that stands like the ghost of a garden sentinel in the corner of the tiny
yard, touched by the general air of decay, struggles fitfully in the raw,
cloudy days of spring to send forth here and there a spiritless blossom.
One must be to the manner born, or carefully instructed, to detect, from
the many signs of ruin all about, the single indication of the state
of the householder. Such an one, perhaps, searching closely under the
warped roof of the gateway, might find and read the cedar ticket which
proclaims, according to law, to any who trouble to stop and read, that in
this house of little ease lives Kudo Jukichi, a Gentleman of the Empire.

Kudo Jukichi, Gentleman! In the first year of Meiji, when he fought
for the restoration of the young Emperor to the power that rightfully
belonged to the Throne, he wore the two swords of a Samurai. But that
was long ago. Kudo-san is an old man now, and thick gray hair covers the
head where once rose the shining black topknot of a warrior. He sits on
the soft mats of his little room with a book, or his pipe, and often
falls to dreaming of the years of his youth, of the stirring events that
threw down the old established order and brought the Emperor again to his
own. And if sometimes there comes to him a twinge of sentimental regret
for the lost ways of life of the old régime, it is but natural. It has
not been easy for Kudo-san to accept many of the changes that came with
the new Western thought. His was not the cast of mind that accommodates
itself readily to novel sensations and experiences. Only his passionate
loyalty and devotion to the Emperor enabled him to smother the feeling
of opposition within him, a feeling purely personal and selfish, in his
Japanese conception, and therefore not entitled to much consideration.
Loyalty with him was something more than a mere sense of duty. It was
instinctive, from the heart, the very essence of his nature, and because
of it he bore without complaint the heavy blows the new order dealt him.

The abolition of feudalism left him helpless, a dependant with none on
whom to depend. But the reorganization of the army, and the promotion of
the outcast Etas to citizenship and the proud opportunity of military
service dazed him. The distinctive privilege of Samuraihood, the right
to bear arms, was destroyed, and after that nothing worse could befall.
The capitalization of his hereditary income followed as a matter of
course, and he accepted with uncomprehending bewilderment the bonds given
him by the government he was no longer to serve. The fabric of his life
was crumbling and he was powerless to stay its ruin. With hands clasped
before him and head reverently bowed he stood in front of his little
shrine and solemnly communed with the shades of the Kudos gone before. It
was a new situation, and doubtful if they could understand. But one thing
he knew, and in gentle voice, with unshaken faith, he announced it.

“It is the Emperor’s wish!”

Fate dealt neither vigorously nor kindly with Kudo. It let him drift.
While his bonds ran their income was sufficient for all his needs, but
when the time of their redemption came he looked in dismay at the heap of
money they brought him. Nothing in all his experience told him what to
do with it. Skillfully invested, it would have furnished ample return,
but investment was a science utterly beneath the contempt of a Samurai.
It was the business of merchants and traders, the men who devoted their
lives to the despicable profession of gaining money. He took his fortune
home, from the bank where it had been paid to him, wrapped up in a blue
cotton bundle-kerchief, and gave it to his wife with the unconcern of
complete scorn. He knew that that bundle alone stood between him and
necessity, but he did not care. He lived contentedly on his little
capital, nor ever let an anxious thought cross his mind because of its
constant decrease.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




II


Scarce two hundred yards distant from the house of Kudo Jukichi, around
the corner in Azalea Street, there is a most striking evidence of the
change the new Western life has brought to the Island Empire. The little
shingle at the gate duly sets forth that Mr. Kutami Chobei, a Commoner,
occupies that comfortable dwelling, but all the city knows it as the home
of Chobei, the Eta. Prosperity radiates from the substantial house and
wide grounds with their pleasant garden, and all the place is enfolded
in its ample mantle. What cares the Commoner Kutami that his humble
station is placarded over his hospitable doorway? But a handbreadth back
in the space of years even that poor title seemed a measure of hopeless
distinction to him. In the yesterday when neighbor Kudo wore the haughty
swords of a Samurai his weapon would have leaped from its scornful
scabbard if Chobei the Eta had dared pollute his presence. It was a great
advance to be one of the multitude in the oblivion of the Commoners
instead of one of the marked few of the Etas, despised, outcast, living
apart from all his fellows except the unfortunates of his class. It had
been a bitter life for Chobei, for although his sheer force of will had
made him Chief of his village, a man of distinction among his own, that
very strength of character made only more keen and poignant the disgrace
of his position. The wealth he had accumulated in his business of
tanner had little pleasure to give him, and it was the business itself,
inherited from his fathers, generation after generation, that made him an
Eta. That great stroke of the Emperor’s which had shaken off the shackles
of his caste restored him to manhood, and he blessed the fate that had
brought the Western ideas to Japan and had set noble and Samurai and
outcast all equal before the law, face to face together with the problems
of individual responsibilities and rewards.

Money is not yet everything in Japan, however rapidly its power may be
advancing. But it is something to the Commoner and it was little better
than nothing to the Eta. Kutami was proud of himself, in an humble way;
proud that he had something to do with when opportunity to do came to
him. More than all he was proud of the new nation, and loyal to it with
the last drop of his blood. He was no soldier, but he did his part
when the forces of the Empire went over sea to meet the armies of the
Chinese in Korea and Manchuria. The business of his outcast days had
grown with great strides under the incentive of his new ambition, and
from being merely a tanner and dealer in leather he had become as well
a manufacturer of boots and shoes. Now it was that the money he had won
furnished the means of making return to the nation, and thousands of
soldiers marched and fought in the boots Kutami the Commoner gave to his
country.

There was no thought in Kutami’s heart of anything but loyalty and
gratitude to his Emperor in this, but there was a result he did not
foresee. Kudo Jukichi had been shaken out of his retirement by the war.
All the old fire was revived in him, and his heart was heavy because he
was neither able to offer service himself nor was his son old enough to
take a soldier’s part. In spite of the fact that they had lived for years
at so little distance from each other, for Kudo it was as if Kutami had
never existed. For though he might admit that there was advantage to the
nation in some of the great changes of his later years, Jukichi was still
at heart the Samurai of the old régime, and to him Chobei was still an
Eta. But the gift of the boots touched his heart.

“Some men are called Samurai in name, but are outcasts at heart,” he
thought. “That man was called outcast but has acted like a Samurai.”

Straightway he put on his finest silk kimono and stalking out of his gate
turned the corner into Azalea Street. There was a flutter of excitement
in the house of the Commoner when it was known that Kudo Jukichi had
come to call. This was an honor that had been beyond their dreams. For,
although there had never been a word between the two families, well the
Commoners knew their gentle neighbors, and it was not without a secret
sympathy that Chobei had noticed the evidence of hard and harder fortune
which increasing days brought to the Samurai. The situation of the
Kudos had become, indeed, very much straitened. Jukichi had contrived
to sell a few of the treasures of art that had been for generations in
the family. But his was no nature for bargaining, and kakemono and vases
that were priceless to genuine collectors had gone for the song the first
unscrupulous dealer had offered. Valiant soldier and skillful swordsman
that he had been, the Samurai was inept in the rough-and-tumble scramble
for existence, and Chobei gladly would have made his sympathy practical
if he had but known how.

It was truly a wonderful event for the Commoner when Jukichi voluntarily
came to visit him. O-Koyo, his wife, herself fluttered into the room
where the distinguished guest was sitting on the soft, white mat, and
brought him tea, that fine long leaf with the heavy flavor of the straw
mats that had kept it always from the sun, so delightful to the taste
of the Japanese connoisseur. Though it was the house of a man possessed
of much wealth, there was no display of riches, except in the exquisite
fineness of the wood, the beautiful grain carefully brought out in the
soft polish and matched with an evenness and skill that betokened unusual
pains and thought. In the alcove of the room where Jukichi sat hung a
single old kakemono of rare merit, and the signature that caught his
eye told him at once of its great value. Beneath it stood a vase of the
famous ware that had long distinguished the old artists of his clan, and
in it a single spray of blossoms. It was in perfect taste, and the old
Samurai, as he sat down, felt a little glow of satisfaction, as if he
had come back at last to the realities of the days before the inrush of
Western innovation had done so much to cheapen and make vulgar all that
it touched of the island art.

The simple directness of his character had not been changed by his years
of vicissitude. The formalities of greeting were hardly ended when
Jukichi plunged into the matter that had brought about his visit.

“I have heard,” he said, “that you have made a great gift to the army.”

A deprecatory smile crossed the face of the Commoner and he bowed very
low.

“Ah, it was nothing,” he replied, politely belittling what he had done.
“It was only a few boots for the soldiers, who are worthy of very much
more than one so humble as I can do for them.”

“Nevertheless it is a fine thing to do,” declared Jukichi, and for an
instant there flashed in his eyes something of the old fire. “It is a
fine thing for one who is not a soldier to give so much to the army.”

Again Kutami bowed very low, and softly protested the trifling character
of his act.

“I have heard that it was an entire division that you supplied,”
continued Jukichi. “I congratulate you. It is a very fortunate thing to
be able to do so much for the Emperor.”

Lower than ever Kutami bowed and for some time his head remained bent
forward. At length he raised it and looked the old Samurai in the face.

“It was nothing at all,” he said in a low voice, “nothing at all. And
the Emperor has done everything for me.”

He wondered what Jukichi would do or say to such direct reference to
his former condition, but loyalty knew no finer quality in the heart of
the Samurai than it found in the breast of the Commoner, and though he
insulted his honored guest, or died for it on the instant, Kutami would
not have withheld that acknowledgment to his Sovereign. And in making it
he touched the deepest chord in the Samurai’s nature.

“I cannot be a soldier myself,” the Commoner went on, after a little,
“and my son is not old enough to take my place. But the Empire has given
me a great deal, and I am very glad that I can give a little something to
the sons of others who offer their lives for it.”

“I, too, cannot be a soldier now,” said Jukichi slowly, after a pause,
“although in other years it was my duty and my privilege. And I, too,
have a son too young to be of service in this war. But he shall be a
soldier some day, and, if Heaven please, an officer of the Emperor.”

The ring of the old clan pride was in the voice and the eyes flashed as
if the father already saw the boy leading his men in the swinging charge.

“You are indeed fortunate,” said Kutami gravely; “it is a great honor
to have such a son, and it is but fitting that the son of such a father
should become an officer.” Again the deprecatory smile crossed his face
as he continued: “But it is not for my son to think of so glorious a
future. He shall do his duty when the time comes, and serve his country
as best he can, but after that I am afraid we could not hope to attain
such honor as it would be to have him continue in the army.”

It was Jukichi’s turn to bow and smile in deprecation. Then he rose to
take his leave, and when Kutami had thanked him for the great honor he
had conferred upon that poor house, he went away with a satisfaction in
his heart he did not attempt to explain.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




III


Jukichi’s son was a fine, sturdy lad who already in the public school
was laying a solid foundation for the technical training which later
was to fit him for an army career. He did not belie his inheritance.
His military instinct manifested itself in the ease with which he
excelled his mates in the martial exercises that formed part of his
school duties. Often, too, it was revealed in his proud bearing toward
his fellows. Ambition found large room in his small breast, and it was
his determination to rival and even excel the exploits and skill of
that great ancestor, Kokan, whose name he bore. Jukichi had begun his
instruction in swordsmanship early, and often the old Masamune blade,
that had been the pride of the Kudos for generations, was brought out to
take its part in the lessons. At fourteen Kokan was captain of a company
of his schoolmates, and the stuff that was in him showed in his grief
that his years unfitted him to bear a soldier’s part in the war with
China.

But the disappointment did not warp him. Rather it tended to confirm
his ambition. And if he had needed a spur he would have found it in the
boundless pride in him displayed by his sister, who was the playfellow
of his home. O-Mitsu-san was four years his junior. As long as she could
remember, from the days when she first toddled out into the yard on
her small _getas_, and robed in the wonderful kimono, gay with bright
butterflies, the days of her life had been devoted to adoration of her
brother. To her he was everything that was fine and noble, and his
imperious spirit received as its just due the deferential homage she
paid to his years and his sex. She was little more than a baby, in the
Western conception, when O-Haru, the gentle mother, went away on the long
journey to the Meido and left the house of Jukichi desolate, and it fell
to her to take her mother’s place in the management of the household and
the anxious care of the slender, steadily diminishing means of support.

“Though the eagle be starving, yet will he not eat grain,” say the
Japanese, and Jukichi fulfilled the saying. No one saw better than he
the inevitable end of the course he was pursuing. No one felt more than
he the need of doing something to secure an income. Kokan would soon
finish with the public schools, and before he would be sufficiently far
advanced to enter one of the Local Military Preparatory Schools he must
have some years of higher instruction, which no school in the city was
fitted to give. The only means of possible relief that presented itself
to Jukichi’s prejudiced view was some sort of trade, a vile bargaining
and selling for the sake of gaining the money which all his life he had
despised. Moreover, he knew that he was unfitted by training as well
as by nature for such work. The simple honesty of the old soldier, to
whom death was a small price to pay for honor, was no match for the
unscrupulous cleverness of men whose native sharpness had been developed
by years of practice in a profession from which nothing else was
expected. And so Jukichi drifted on.

Between O-Haru and Jukichi there had existed a serene sweetness and depth
of love such as seems impossible to the Western world, unused to the
Japanese way, where marriages are so often matters of arrangement rather
than sentiment. Perhaps it was the recollection of what she had been to
him, and the profound sense of his loss, that kept Jukichi a widower. But
the death of her mother brought some recompense to the little girl in the
transfer to her of much of the calm and confident affection which had
been O-Haru’s happiness. More and more her father grew to depend on her
in many matters in which he had followed the guidance of her mother, and
there developed in her a judgment and self-reliance not often found in
one of her years. While yet a child in age she was a woman in character.
Not much of her time was spent in school, yet her instruction was not
scanty for a Japanese girl. Most of it had been given by her father,
whose mode of life left him ample leisure for her lessons. She read
well and she had the books of the _Bunko_ that had been her mother’s. Of
this “Japanese Lady’s Library” she was diligently studious, and already
had attained familiarity with “Woman’s Household Instruction,” and the
“Lesser Learning for Woman,” and was intent upon the main part of the
work, the profound “Greater Learning.” Besides, she knew the “Hundred
Poems,” and often joined with her father and brother in an evening game
of quotations. There was little interruption of the quiet current of the
family life, and Jukichi loved to put aside pipe or book, when no visitor
had come, and play thus with his children. But neither he nor Kokan ever
gave a thought to the future of the girl, or noticed the promise she gave
of beautiful womanhood.

She was a lonely child for one so bright and winning. Her friends were
very few, not because of her condition, for poverty is all too common in
Japan to be disgraceful, and many families of great rank have known its
bitter pinch. It was rather because of a gentle, instinctive shyness that
made her recoil from the often boisterous gayety of her schoolmates.
But one there was who held large place in her childish esteem. It was a
friendship that began with her schooling. Her father had taken her to
the school that first day, for Kokan had finished the primary grades and
went to a different school in another part of the city. The master was
a large, stern man, with solemn, forbidding face, and O-Mitsu-san was
filled with fear. He took her into a great barren room, filled with hard,
high benches where sat a multitude of other little boys and girls. He
showed her a bench and told her to sit down, and when she took her place,
the other children looked at her and whispered together and laughed. She
was frightened, and presently, when the master, with a big whip in his
hand, called her name in a loud voice, she put her head down on her hands
and sobbed with fear. Then the other children laughed more and the master
commanded silence in a voice that terrified her. She was very miserable
and wished only to get away from that dreadful place and to go home
again. By and by a bell rang, and all the children stood up and went out.
But one little boy came to her and said shyly:

“Don’t cry, little girl. Come and play.”

After a time, when she had ceased to sob, she looked up into his round
face and said:

“What is your name, boy?”

The boy smiled and answered:

“Soichi. Come and play.”

Then they went out and played, and by and by, when it was time to go
home, the little boy walked along with her and she was glad. His home was
just around the corner from hers, in the fine big house in Azalea Street.
He was a funny boy, for he asked her not to tell her father that she had
played with him, or that he had walked part way home with her. When she
asked him why, he would not tell, but said that some day she would find
out, and that would be time enough to tell if she wanted to. Poor little
Soichi! Already the boy was learning the hard lesson that old disgrace,
however unmerited, cannot be put aside lightly, even by law, and the wise
young head knew that the child of the Eta was no playmate, in his world’s
eyes, for the daughter of a Samurai.

O-Mitsu cared not at all then. She knew only that he had been kind to her
in her wretchedness, and she liked him loyally for that, and loyally,
too, she kept her promise not to tell. So they met at school and played,
sometimes with other children but often by themselves. Thus several happy
months went by and then O-Mitsu got her first great lesson in the new
life of the nation. She found out about Soichi. There were plenty of
children to tell when it seemed there was a chance of causing pain, for
the Japanese child has no less a barbarian heart than many who live in
the Western world. The little girl was greatly troubled. She liked the
boy and enjoyed the games with him. But the daughter of a Samurai knew
her position. She had learned now that the stern looks of the master
masked a kindly heart, and her first fear of him was gone. To him she
went in her perplexity.

“Why is it,” she asked, “that the Eta boy comes to this school? Are not
Etas outcasts?”

The wise teacher smiled gently and said:

“That was true, O-Mitsu-san, but it is not so now. Did you not know that
the Emperor has promoted them, and given them the same rights as all the
rest of us?”

“Then are they like us now?” she asked.

“Yes, child,” replied the teacher softly, for he, too, was a Samurai and
knew what was in the heart of his little questioner, “and because it is
the Emperor’s will they must no longer be treated as they were.”

“I am glad,” said O-Mitsu shortly, and went out into the yard to join the
game in which Soichi had a part.

But when school was over and Soichi was walking toward home with her she
kept silent for a long time. At length, raising her eyes and looking at
him, she said:

“I know why now, Soichi.”

At once the boy stopped. The training of bitter experience prepared him
to hear her proudly scornful decision. But when she was silent he dared
at length to ask:

“Why do you not say it?”

But she smiled and answered:

“I do not care, and I will not tell. Teacher says it is right because the
Emperor did it. Come, let us go home.”

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




IV


Kutami the Commoner was fat and jolly. He lived well and put trouble
behind him whenever it showed its ugly head. He liked to talk and smoke
and visit with the friends who came often to his comfortable house to
enjoy his hospitality. For though among the Samurai and the gently born
the old prejudice against the Etas was far from extinction, among the
Commoners there was little inclination to supercilious remembrance,
especially when one had been so successful as Kutami. The visit of
Jukichi to his house had had a marked effect. Often since that memorable
afternoon the wagging tongues of Kutami’s friends had discussed the proud
old man and his hard situation. Many a suggestion was made as to how it
might be improved, but none which it seemed likely he would accept. The
generous impulses of his admirers were barred by the stubborn pride they
were not willing to encounter.

Life in many of its details is not so different in Japanese cities to
what it is in the Western world. Neighbors gossip just the same, and pry
out secrets and imagine motives just as they do among Occidentals, and
just as often hit the mark. They knew Jukichi’s ambition for Kokan, and
how more and more doubtful of fulfillment it was becoming.

“How foolish he is!” said Komatsu, the cloth merchant, one evening when
the subject had been discussed for the fortieth time. “With what he had
from his pension he might have done many things, and been as rich now,
perhaps, as Chobei here, who does not know what to do with his wealth.”

“A curio shop, for instance,” said Uchida, the ivory carver; “many
Samurai have done that, and with his knowledge of such things and his
friends to help him get them, or to buy from, he might have made a great
success.”

“But instead of that he has only sold some of his own things for a
child’s price, and grows poorer every day!” Komatsu seemed as near to
being disgusted as was possible for his good nature.

“How little you know him after all,” said one of the group who until now
had taken no part in the gossip. It was Matsumoto, a Samurai who had made
his way in the very fashion outlined by Uchida, and whose advertisement,
proclaiming his rank, is thrust into the hand of every foreigner who
steps ashore at a Japanese port. But he had the native genius for trade
as well as the insight into character which told him how utterly lacking
it was in Jukichi. “He could never be a merchant,” Matsumoto continued.
“The world is just what a man’s heart makes it. Kudo-san would find only
misery and hatred in becoming a trader, and would fail before he had
thoroughly begun.”

“Ah, that is true,” cried Chobei, “that is quite the truth. I do not know
what he could do.”

“That is plain,” replied Matsumoto. “He was a great swordsman in his day
and has a fine reputation. He could give fencing lessons. He has taught
his son, who already excels the other boys in school. Let him teach the
sons of others.”

That was a practical suggestion of which all felt the force. But the real
difficulty lay in approaching Jukichi. There was plenty of talk about
that, but the gossips went away without having reached a conclusion. A
long time after his friends had gone Chobei sat with his little pipe, in
deep consideration of the subject. In his abstraction he rapped so hard
on the _hibachi_, knocking out the ashes, that O-Koyo came into the room
to see what was the matter. There had never been many secrets between
them, and now Chobei looked up and began at once to speak of the problem
that was perplexing him.

“You know I have long been desirous of assisting Kudo-san,” he said, “but
have not understood the means to be employed. To-night Matsumoto-san has
given me an idea. It is that he can teach fencing; but how shall we get
him the pupils without his suspecting that we do it to help him?”

“We have one,” replied O-Koyo. “We could ask him as a favor to teach our
son.”

“No, no,” said Chobei, at once. “That would not do at all, for I have
told him that Soichi is not to be a soldier, and he knows our son has no
need of fencing.”

“Well, then,” said O-Koyo, “I do not know what to do. It seems to me that
he is a very foolishly proud old man.”

“Ah, yes,” replied Chobei, “but he is one of those who belong to the old
Empire and he cannot change. It is very strange and very hard.”

“Hardest for his son,” said O-Koyo. “How can that boy become an officer
of the army without education, and how can Kudo-san give it to him? There
is no school here and he cannot send the boy away.”

As he listened to his wife speaking these words a new light dawned upon
Chobei. He saw the way.

“We must make that school,” he exclaimed, and drew in his breath so hard
that it whistled through his teeth. “We will found a new one to fit boys
for the Military Preparatory Schools, and Kokan shall have his education.
Yes, yes! That is what we must do! There shall be a place for Kudo-san.
I will ask him myself. It will be a great honor to us if he will teach
the fencing and swordsmanship. Then when his son must go away he will
have something to meet the expense.”

So the idea was born. There followed much thought and talk among Chobei’s
friends, and one day the local newspapers announced that the authorities
had given permission to Mr. Kutami Chobei to establish a new school,
which the founder agreed to maintain. It would be the link between the
existing institutions of the city and those of the central Government.
The courses were to be general, but there was to be special instruction
for such boys as desired to fit themselves to enter any one of the six
Government Local Military Preparatory Schools with a view to competing
for a commission in the army.

It was the shrewd Matsumoto who had suggested this method of bringing
the new school to the notice of Jukichi, and his reading of the old
man’s character was not at fault. Not a hint of the personal opportunity
offered came to the Samurai as he read the news in his paper. To him it
was only another evidence of the patriotism of his neighbor, and he was
about to set out on a second visit of congratulation, when a messenger
brought a letter from Chobei. It was a very humble letter, as befitted
the circumstance of a promoted Eta writing to a Samurai. The Commoner
hoped that Kudo-san had heard of the projected school and that it would
meet with his approbation. There were some matters concerning its
administration and the courses of study to be provided, about which it
would be a distinguished honor to him to consult with Kudo-san, and in
view of the previous marked kindness, he dared to beg the condescension
of an appointment. The advice of Kudo-san would be a very material
assistance as well as a great honor.

Jukichi thrust the letter into the sleeve of his kimono and stalked
around the corner into Azalea Street. There was a smile on Kutami’s face
when he saw how his bait had been swallowed, and he silently blessed
Matsumoto for his inspiration.

“It is a great presumption for such as I,” he said when the tea had been
brought and Jukichi’s first congratulations were offered, “to think
of undertaking such a work. No doubt it would have been better if some
gentleman had been willing to do it. But, as it is, I am glad to have
the opportunity. I have observed for some time, and with much regret,
that many of the young men of the city have been obliged to go away to
complete their preparatory education, especially those who mean to enter
the army, and I hope this school will be able to remedy that fault.”

Jukichi bowed in his courtly fashion and paused respectfully before
replying.

“It is an honor to the city,” he said at length, “to have so
public-spirited a citizen.”

With profoundest salute Kutami acknowledged the compliment and protested
his unworthiness.

“There is very much to do,” he said slowly, “and I am poorly fitted to
make suggestions. I hope you will not believe me rude or unthinking if I
venture to tell you it has been suggested to me that perhaps you yourself
would be willing to help.”

The trial was made, and Kutami sat with narrowing eyes, watching his
visitor to note the effect. For a moment or two Jukichi sat perfectly
still, with face completely masking his feelings. Then he bowed deeply,
with strong sibilant inspiration.

“I?” he said, with show of surprise. “It is an unexpected honor. I am
quite unworthy to assist in so valuable a work. I do not know what I
could do.”

The Commoner breathed more freely. He had dreaded a fiery outburst from
the hot-tempered old man, and when it did not come he could hardly
conceal his relief. He felt that Jukichi’s coöperation was more than half
promised when it was not at once indignantly refused.

“Who in the city could do more?” he exclaimed. “Who could confer such
honor upon so humble an undertaking?”

Jukichi did not reply. Since the day when he saw the struggle for the
Restoration successful, the old man, still clinging fondly to the life
of the old régime, had been nevertheless drifting unconsciously toward
participation in the new. But he was yet far from open avowal, and the
proposition of Kutami came to him with a shock. He saw, however, that he
had opened the way for it himself, and merely asked to be excused from
giving immediate reply. Then with renewed congratulations and polite
expression of good-will, he went away, leaving the Commoner uncertain but
hopeful.

With genuine sorrow Kutami saw the Samurai pass through his gate
unpledged. But he went on with the work, and soon the new building
approached completion. Every detail was arranged but the most important
of all. For Jukichi still declined to commit himself. If he failed to
secure the Samurai, though he succeeded in all else, Kutami felt that
the whole undertaking would fail. But he exhausted his ingenuity without
success. The pride of his abolished caste still dominated the Samurai. It
was an incident beyond the knowledge of either that determined Jukichi.

Jealousy is not the curse of race or rank. It finds its lodgment in
the breasts of rich and poor alike, in Occidental and Oriental. It was
O-Koyo who found the first evidence of it in a newspaper wrapped around
a casual purchase, and with unconcealed emotion took it to her husband,
reviling herself for being the bearer of ill news. Poor Kutami! Of all
the hard thrusts and unkind blows of his none too easy life this was the
meanest and worst. It was a savage attack on his cherished scheme. The
school plan had been devised in all sincerity, with the sole purpose of
giving aid, without its being known, to the man who, he felt, had honored
him by entering his house, and whom he greatly admired. But here he saw
his honest, manly work scornfully derided, his simple purpose wantonly
distorted and himself held up to ridicule more bitter than his bitterest
outcast days had ever known. Every one could see what the real object of
the new school was, said the paper. The spawn of the frog was hoping to
be hatched out into eagles. But fine dress and large words did not hide
the outcast. The Eta, though he clothed an army and built a thousand
schools, was only an Eta. Law might call him a Commoner; it could not
make him clean. Contamination was in all that he touched. Out upon the
upstart with his vile wealth, who dared presume to offer schooling to the
sons of men of birth!

With heart too heavy for words Kutami gave back the paper to his wife.
The cruel blow seemed to have struck down at once his ambition and his
energy. He sat like one paralyzed and could neither think nor speak. And
O-Koyo, tearing up the wretched paper in a frenzy of grief, as if thus to
destroy the slander, threw herself down on the mat and sobbed aloud.

There was no fight left in Kutami. But Matsumoto, the curio dealer, with
the old Samurai courage untouched in his heart, strove to inspirit his
friend, and the building was finished. The Government officials had taken
no notice of the attack on the founder, and the newspaper discussion
provoked by it died away with no immediately discernible effect.

In the seclusion of his quiet home Jukichi had not heard the bitter
denunciation of the new school. He was absorbed in the old problem of
Kokan’s future. The money he had received from the Government was almost
at an end. His treasures were sold, his resources exhausted. Swayed to
and fro by the currents of conflicting emotion he sat, still undecided,
still reluctant to grasp the proffered relief.

From one of her old schoolmates O-Mitsu heard the story and told her
father. The old man listened with flashing eyes, and when she finished
his decision was made. For himself he would not take the step, but to
help another, even one who had been an Eta, appealed to his sympathy and
his sense of honor.

The day of the opening arrived, and then the result of the slander
appeared. No pupils came to the new school. In painful embarrassment the
governor of the Ken stood in the great, bare, main room and heard the
pitiful words of unhappy Kutami presenting his gift to the city. Vain
and empty sounded the pompous response. The teachers, gathered for their
hopeful task, found nothing to do. The ceremonies were over. The governor
and his officials turned to go away, glad the disagreeable business
was ended. In the doorway stood an old man and a boy. With grave and
dignified salute they waited while the governor passed out. Then into
the building they marched and up to the office of the head-master. Five
minutes later two students were duly registered and the new school was
opened, with Kudo Jukichi and Kudo Kokan its first pupils.

Jukichi had committed himself at last, but the scandalous assault came
very near to success. For several days not another pupil appeared. Then
the word went abroad that Kudo Jukichi, the Samurai, had registered
his son, who was in daily attendance, and that Kudo-san himself had
become instructor of swordsmanship. Men who had hoped to have their sons
profit by the new institution, but who had been held back by cowardly
apprehension, rejoiced at the relief, and some who secretly sympathized
with the attack, and hated to see this evidence of the progress of the
upstart succeed, were shamed into supporting it. The day was won for
Kutami, and it was a victory infinitely sweeter than his bitterest
calumniator could have imagined, for a reason of which scarce half a
dozen persons in all the city had any inkling.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




V


More and more as he grew older, young Kudo Kokan betrayed the haughty
spirit that had characterized his ancestors. To him Kutami the Commoner
was still Chobei the Eta. With no hint of how intimately his own career
was connected with the success of the new school, he was much opposed to
having anything to do with it. But as the days passed, and others of his
inherited standing filled his classes, his active opposition relaxed into
scorn of the man and the institution from which he profited so much.

Boys are boys just as much in Japan as in any other country, and
must grow to manhood through the same struggles and with just as much
exhibition of their native barbarity. It was in the second year of
Kokan’s attendance at the new school that Kutami entered his own son,
who was preparing for a course at the university. Soichi was growing
very tall and strong, fonder of sports and games, of military drill and
marches than of books and hard study. Now for the first time he met the
young Samurai. The early friendship with O-Mitsu had run its course of
vicissitudes and pleasures, and seemed to have come to the fork in the
road. As the girl grew older and learned more of the ways of her world,
she came to understand more fully what had been intended by the little
talebearer who first informed her of Soichi’s social station. She saw
the proud attitude of her father toward the Commoner, and her friendship
with the boy was not mentioned at home. Apparently that was the only
circumstance which distinguished it from scores of other boy and girl
friendships. But the fact that it was not wise to say anything about it
gave it a fictitious importance, and perhaps made it linger in a tenderer
corner of the girl’s recollection.

The appearance of Soichi at the school offered occasion to Kokan for the
revelation of his least lovable qualities, and, boylike, he promptly
showed them. He took delight in suppressed sneers and open snubs. And
Soichi, being a boy of high spirit and no mean courage, cherished a
sturdy resentment. Savagery is indigenous with most real boys. Before
they have reached the age of reason it crops out persistently, whether
their skins are brown or white, whether their eyes tilt upward at the
corners or lie straight across the face. But it is of two kinds, merely
exuberant spirits, impersonal, horse-playful, or vicious and vindictive.
Kokan had no intention to be mean, but often pranks played just for the
fun of it are none the less cruel, and what starts in good-natured play
ends in deadly earnest. And Kokan misjudged the mettle of Soichi. He
had the easy confidence of assured superiority and could not guess that
beneath the jacket of the boy he often derided with the scornful name of
Eta there beat a heart as stout as his own.

Unconsciously, too, he had a large advantage. For Soichi knew the secret
Kokan did not, of the real reason for the founding of the school, and at
any time could have given his tormentor a thrust that would have brought
his insolent pride abjectly to the dust. Not many American or European
boys would have stood proof against such a test, for they are not trained
in the ideas of filial obedience and loyalty, that are the inheritance
of the Japanese. Soichi knew that a single word from him would end his
persecution, but at the same time it might be the ruin of all his father
had tried to do, and he held his tongue. And, because he thought he
dealt with unresisting putty, Kokan went from bad to worse. The taunt
that had been but a joke at first became a thing of venom, and his easy,
indifferent contempt began to grow into something almost hatred.

How little beyond their noses most boys can see! Kokan came to believe
there was no flint at all in Soichi, for try as he would, he could not
strike fire. Then came the thunder-bolt.

The year’s work was almost finished. A few days more and Kokan would be
graduated. It was with a sense of great relief that Soichi saw the end so
near. It had been a bitter year for him. Not only had Kokan’s taunts and
persecution strained his endurance almost to breaking; it had cost him
the sympathy and friendship of many of his fellows, who misconstrued his
silence and had come to believe with his tormentor that he was a boy of
no spirit. He thought it all over by himself and a great resolve came to
him. As he walked alone to the school one morning he planned his course.
Let the result be what it might, his mates should see that it was not
fear that had kept him from open resentment.

The bell rang and the boys came trooping in from the playground. Standing
aloof, Soichi watched until he saw Kokan. The Samurai boy walked briskly,
talking light-heartedly with two or three companions. To enter the
building he must pass close to the spot where the Commoner stood. Soichi
waited until Kokan and his friends were but a few feet away, then stepped
directly in front of them, and turning his back, walked slowly toward the
door. Instantly Kokan understood that a crisis had come. For a moment he
was too amazed to speak. Then he shouted:

“What do you mean, Eta? Get out of my way!”

Soichi made no reply, and stepped more slowly than before. Kokan was
almost on his heels.

“Jump, dog!” the young Samurai shouted in sudden anger; “jump before I
kick you!”

For answer Soichi turned and without a word slapped him smartly across
the mouth with the flat of his hand.

A moment Kokan stood like one turned to stone. It was as if the blow
had paralyzed every faculty, not by its force but by its shock. Then in
wild fury he sprang forward, his hands outstretched as if to clutch and
tear to pieces the boy who had dared to strike him. Soichi was ready. In
strength and stature he was quite a match for his frantic antagonist;
but it needed no force to meet that furious rush. Swifter than sight his
hands went forward, caught the arms reaching out to seize him, and with
a single twitch hurled the Samurai boy bodily over his head. Then like a
cat he whirled to meet a new attack. It was a trick he had often played
on the practice mats of the gymnasium, where not in vain had he worked
that year with the master of jiu-jitsu.

[Illustration: Hurled the Samurai boy bodily over his head.]

Dazed by the force of his fall Kokan struggled to his feet, mad with
rage. Fortunate then for them both that the wearing of swords was no
longer the Samurai’s privilege, else Soichi would have been killed in
his tracks. But if passion had blinded Kokan, his friends could still
see, and before another wild rush should give Soichi a second opportunity
they had seized both boys and held them apart. In another moment the
master, who from the doorway saw and heard it all, had reached them, and
discipline was beginning to work.

“He insulted the Emperor and I struck him,” said Soichi calmly, when they
examined him. “If I had had a sword I should have cut him down.”

“What?” said the master, “insulted the Emperor!”

“It is false!” cried Kokan, restored to outward calm, but with heart
burning with hatred. “I did not!”

“He called me Eta,” retorted Soichi, “and the Emperor has decreed that
there are no more Etas.”

Before that reasoning even Kokan was silent, and because he was Jukichi’s
son the master found a way to let the matter drop.

Soichi had given a proof of his spirit, which every boy in the school was
ready to accept. He had won his point, but the young Samurai went away
to his military school with a bitterness rankling in his heart it was to
take years to cure. The quarrel had its effect in the house in Timber
Street no less than in the home of Kutami. Jukichi at once left his place
as instructor and opened classes of his own. It did not matter. The
work for which the school had been founded was done, and the Commoner,
grieving that it had come to such result, nevertheless was satisfied, and
more than ever proud of the son who had shown both his courage and his
patience.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




VI


The period of “Little Plenty” was wearing to its close. Already the
wistaria blossoms were fading and the gorgeous azaleas were dropping
their petals. In the fields the barley heads had turned to yellow and
the young rice in the seed beds stood tall and strong in its thick green
rows awaiting the harvest that should make room for it. It was a day when
even nature rested and basked in the smile of heaven. The sun shone as if
pouring the accumulated experience of millions of years into each moment,
saturating earth and trees and flowers and grass with a deluge of molten
gold. The vast blue arch gleamed like a great aërial mirror, reflecting
the wide expanse of motionless sea that lay shimmering in the sunlight,
unmarked by a single ripple. On its sleeping surface myriad fishing
boats, with dull gray hulls and red brown sails, drifted and dozed. The
noisy calls of the city were hushed, and to the girl sitting among the
trees on the crest of the pine-clad cone beyond the end of Timber Street
there rose only now and then a muffled sound, like the dull roll of surf
on a far-distant beach. Only life that was wild sent its challenge to
her. Natsu-zemi shrilled his strident ji-i-iii from the branches over the
Shinto shrine in vigorous chorus, as if determined to make the uttermost
of such a day, and Min-min-zemi chanted his ritual over and over from
scores of trees, singing the prayer that has no end.

Six years had more than fulfilled the promise of her childhood for Kudo
O-Mitsu. At eighteen she was the full-blown flower of which at twelve she
had been only the bud. Such an one she was as would set the hearts of
half a city a-throb by a single glance, even a city where men care not
overmuch for maidens, and passion is rarely of the tender sort until
years of association have coddled it into flame. Her face was a long,
narrow oval, the stamp of her gentle birth, exquisitely curved from cheek
to chin and rounded to the delicate point that emphasized her beauty
and yet revealed her determination. Narrow at the top and broadening to
the temples, her ivory-white forehead disclosed the outline of beloved
Fujiyama, the sacred mountain of her race. The full lips of her little
mouth were brilliant with the stain of luscious cherries. Above a great
mass of shining, jetlike hair gleamed softly the green jade of the
ornaments that betrayed her years.

She sat leaning a little forward, the slender fingers of one hand half
supporting, half caressing her chin, and gazed dreamily out at the
splendid pageant of sea and shore spread before her. But its beauty
was not in her thought. The wonderful shimmer of the opalescent water,
now heliotrope, now tan, now pearl, under the rapturous rays of the
afternoon sun, the soft blue of the roofs rising here and there through
the brilliant green of the verdured hills, had now no charm for her. The
melancholy note of the wild dove, calling sweetly from the deep recesses
of the pines, suited more her mood. For trouble had come to O-Mitsu, of a
kind she did not know how to meet. Chukei, the _nakodo_, the professional
matchmaker, had called to see her father.

To the old Samurai, hardly less than to the girl, his message had come
with a shock. For as unconsciously as she had grown to womanhood, so
unconsciously had he seen her grow, with never a thought of the demand
for her that time was certain to bring. The son of whom he was so proud
was gone to the army. That year he had received his commission and joined
his regiment. The red cap-band of the Guards was a badge of honor for
Jukichi, and he dwelt lovingly on the future of the young officer who
had begun his career by winning appointment to the proudest service in
the land. But the old man missed the boy, and honor could not entirely
fill his place in the lonely house. It was the girl who brought sunshine
into Jukichi’s daily routine. The classes and the lessons that had earned
their humble subsistence still occupied part of his time, but the old
man had lost his zest for them, and his urgent need had passed. Kokan’s
pay was enough for them all considering their simple way of life, and
Jukichi, feeling his years, was beginning to contemplate the time when he
should resign his cares, and as _inkyo_, live out his days in rest and
peace.

In all such dreams O-Mitsu had her share. Jukichi did not mean
deliberately to keep her from the marriage to which every Japanese girl
looks forward, but he put the thought of it from him as unpleasant, and
Chukei had forced it on him against his will. He turned the _nakodo_
away with evasive answer and scant encouragement. Then for hours he sat
thinking of the girl and her future. After supper, when she brought his
pipe, he said:

“I have received a proposal of marriage for you.”

She put down his tobacco pouch and sat still, a sudden clutching about
her heart as if of suffocation. For some time Jukichi said nothing more,
then he added:

“Chukei-san, a _nakodo_, has been here to see me about it.”

“Ah,” she said, with a pitiful little effort to smile. Her father had
given no hint yet of his own feeling, and she dreaded what was to come.
She was not prepared for this. She had not thought of it. Kokan and her
father had made up her world, and she did not know what to say. The old
man sat looking at her fondly, and for a few moments neither spoke. Then
he said slowly:

“Yamamoto-san, the silk merchant, makes proposal on behalf of his son.”

She smiled again, and with better will, for somehow she found relief in
the words and manner of speaking. Besides, she did not know the young man
who had honored her, and she began to feel that perhaps her father might
not consent. She had no wish to marry, and she was not the girl to do so
simply for the asking. At length, as her father said no more, she plucked
up courage, and bowing deferentially to him, said:

“I do not wish to marry yet. It is better for me, if you will, to live
here with you until perhaps Kokan shall bring you another daughter to
keep the house.”

A smile of pleasure lighted the old man’s face.

“Ha,” he said, “it is as I wished you would feel.”

Then, if he had been an Occidental, he would have kissed his daughter,
and heart to heart they would have talked until the matter was settled.
But deep and true though affection may be among the Japanese, it finds
small show in outward expression, and caresses are signs of weakness.

“I have made no answer,” he went on, after a little. “I had no will to
have you marry if you were not ready.”

His hand moved a little as if to touch her arm, and his eyes glistened
with unusual emotion.

“I will tell Chukei-san.”

That was all. The incident was ended; but the girl, wiser by instinct
than her father, although without experience, marked it for the
beginning. What was it that stirred her heart in protest so strangely and
so strongly? She did not know. The ghost of some long dead experience,
perhaps. The wood dove in the trees behind her called plaintively to its
unseen mate. The sun slid down the western heaven and threw his long
rays caressingly over her, face to face with a world-old perplexity. Why
should she be sad at the prospect for which other girls longed? It was
the pleasant homelife with her father, and the deep, quiet home love,
she thought at last; life and love that knew no change. That was the
way she wished to go on, and with a sudden blaze of anger she hated old
Chukei for his unwelcome interference. Gradually her mind recovered its
old poise, and she saw the course she would take. Her father’s attitude
was her good fortune. As long as he continued in that mood the menace was
shorn of its power, and after that—The huge red sun splashed into the
flaming sea, and with its parting fire flashing back from her lambent
eyes she rose and started down the winding path toward home.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




VII


There was joy in the house in Azalea Street. Soichi had come home. His
work at the university was finished, and despite his dislike for study he
had taken high place in honor of the father who wished him to. Now he had
returned to make a beginning in the career Kutami had planned for him.
But for a time there was to be no work. Father and mother and son were
to play a little together and give rein to the pleasure of the reunion.
After that the new venture would take all the effort of both men.

Kutami intended to branch out. The old business was good enough for
him, but the son was worthy of something better. He should be a banker,
and already the Commoner had arranged with some of his wealthy business
associates for the founding of the new institution which should give
Soichi his opportunity. The friends who gathered at the comfortable
house to celebrate the joyful return of the young man, discussed the new
project with unflagging enthusiasm, and all predicted a proud success for
Soichi. The sake cups were often exchanged and many cigarettes perfumed
the air. There was no flaw anywhere.

It was the next afternoon that Kutami, trudging along through Timber
Street on his way back from his office, and turning over in his mind
his plans for his son, passed the house of Jukichi. A drizzling rain
was falling, but the Commoner, secure under the wide shelter of his
yellow, oiled-paper umbrella, cared nothing for that. As he passed the
gate of the Samurai a gust of wind swirling through the street tilted
the umbrella sharply back, and Kutami glanced up just in time to see old
Chukei, the matchmaker, coming out.

“Oho!” he said, as he saw the middleman, “a wedding, eh? I wonder what
lucky young fellow it can be who is to have Kudo-san’s daughter for his
wife.”

He paused for a moment, looking after the _nakodo_ as he strode toward
the city, then turned and went on. It was no affair of his after all, and
before he had reached his own home he was back again in the absorbing
subject of Soichi and the new bank, and had forgotten all about Jukichi’s
daughter.

Shrewd old Chukei had met a puzzling rebuff. The circumstances were
everything that to his mind foreshadowed a successful negotiation. But
he had been sent away with almost no explanation. The _nakodo_ shook his
head and plodded along, wondering what to do.

O-Mitsu was happy. Not soon again, she thought, would this particular
middleman return to her father’s house with his annoying business. With
unwonted lightness of heart she went about her work. Then when the rain
ceased and the sun came out, she stepped out into the yard and on the
tall _getas_ that guarded her dainty feet from the mud, took her way up
the path toward her favorite spot among the pines by the old shrine.
The world was greatly changed for her since last she looked out upon
that familiar scene. The sails of the fishing-boats bellied out under
the fresh breeze, the spray dashed over their bows, the trees swayed and
nodded, everywhere was life and activity. The whole world sang and her
heart with it.

She stood a long time gazing down at the spreading sea, quite unconscious
that another had climbed the steep path, one who now found even a more
entrancing picture before his eyes than the wonderful view below them.
It was Soichi, come to visit the old shrine. All unprepared for the
vision that came so suddenly before him as he turned to look down on the
well-remembered shore, it was hard to stifle his admiration and surprise.

Leaning a little against a gnarled old pine, she stood motionless, her
strong profile and the exquisite curve of her chin revealed unwittingly
to him as he paused, half concealed by a clump of trees. Back over the
years since he had seen her, the rush of memory took him to that day when
she had told him that she knew his secret. He saw her again standing in
the road and bidding him, with a smile, come on with her. And now that
little girl was this beautiful woman! She had not changed, and yet she
was all changed.

Slowly the tide of emotion swelled within him. He could not remember that
he had ever thought she was a pretty girl, and in the years he had spent
at the university he had scarcely thought of her at all. He had seen many
pretty girls there, but never had one affected him like this. Now he saw
at a glance that she was wonderfully beautiful, and the more he looked
the more wonderful she became. It dawned on him that she was much the
most beautiful woman he had ever seen, and immediately he had an almost
irresistible longing to go to her at once and tell her so.

An unhappy thought of himself restrained him. They were no longer
schoolfellows. She was the daughter of a Samurai and he—Poor Soichi! Not
even his university life had taken from his own consciousness all taint
of the old disgrace. He did not know, because he had had no experience,
that love is _heimin_ as well as _shizoku_, a Commoner as often as a
Gentleman, and that there is never advantage in loving a girl unless you
tell her so.

He moved a little, and a snapping twig told her that some one was near.
She turned quickly and their eyes met. A long moment they stood so and
neither spoke, yet in that moment the whole world changed for each of
them. Under his steady gaze she felt the blush come tingling up her
throat and spread across her cheeks. Like one grown fast to the ground on
which he rested, he stood and only stared. His brain refused to act, his
tongue to work. Then she moved, and the spell was broken.

“O-Mitsu-san!” he cried, and tone and glance told all he would have
uttered.

With all her face rosy with warm blood she gazed fearlessly back into
his eyes, and murmured softly a single word, yet one instinct with the
feeling of a thousand.

“Thou,” she said, in the old familiar language of their childhood.

Even as eyes and look had spoken for him when voice and tongue were
mute, so had she answered. His ugly doubts of himself fled at first
sight of her smile and it was the old Soichi who sprang forward to her
side. A thousand questions trembled on his lips and struggled in vain
for utterance. His unruly tongue refused its function, and he stopped in
confusion, even his bold eyes falling before her smiling glance. It was
the girl, older than he in such matters by hundreds of years of heritage,
who said lightly after a little pause:

“I did not know that you had come home.”

A dozen emotions fought together for expression, but all were crowded
back, and he answered in commonplace:

“I have been here nearly a week.”

“So long?” she said, questioning.

He fancied he caught a note of reproach in her tone, so far had his
self-esteem come back, and a pang of regret crossed him at the thought
that he had lost those days.

“I am a fool,” he said irrelevantly, but with air so dejected that one
far less clever than she would have followed his thought.

She laughed merrily, and the sound of her voice completed his undoing.
He was back to elemental simplicity again, and the passion that was
uppermost in his heart came bursting out with truthful bluntness.

“You are the most beautiful woman in all the world,” he said.

Again the blush swept across her face and the long lashes fell over the
merry eyes. The flood-gate of his speech was lifted at last. The torrent
of his emotion flowed forth with the rush of waters long pent up, telling
her the ancient story he had known all his life, but which only that last
quarter hour had revealed to him. And the girl, listening with fluttering
heart, heard more than he said, for he was answering the question she had
asked herself, and she understood now her hot protest at the message of
the _nakodo_.

They sat down by the great rock on the far slope of the hill, where the
thick pines screened them from the view of visitors to the shrine, and
where the sea lay blue, strong, and peaceful below them. For an hour
of which no power ever could rob them, heart was laid bare to heart.
Innocently, simply, with the peace of the glorious day, they prattled of
the wonder that was theirs, the discovery they alone of all the world had
made, and never a thought cloud floated across their heaven to disturb
the serenity of its sunshine.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




VIII


It was a good thing for Soichi that he had received the proper Japanese
training in emotional self-repression or he certainly would have betrayed
his secret very soon after his return to the house in Azalea Street.
It not only filled him to the overflowing point; it enveloped him
roundabout. He was drowned in it. Only the strong force of habit saved
him, and the preoccupation of his parents prevented them from noticing
his sudden distraction and absent-mindedness. Four days went by, two so
long that night seemed never to come, and two so short that he remembered
of each nothing but the blissful hour when he had seen O-Mitsu. They had
lived over again the past and drunk the joy of the present. Then came the
specter. Boys and girls who fall in love in Japan, where the _nakodo_
does most of the wooing, have even less chance than Western lovers for
the proverbially rare smooth course of affection. And when he is of such
humble descent as Soichi and she the daughter of a Samurai, that little
chance is very small indeed. But they were true Japanese and had no lack
of courage. They looked their trouble squarely in the eyes and questioned
only how to meet it.

“Do you remember the teacher who frightened me so that first day at
school?” she asked, going back again to the beginning of all things.
“When they told me first that I should not play with you I asked him if
it were so. Do you know what he said?”

“Yes, I know,” he answered, a little sadly, for he saw how always the
specter stood between them.

“He was a Samurai,” she went on, “and he knew. He said the Emperor had
destroyed the old distinction and we were all alike.”

“Yes,” he replied, “before the law. But there are some things that not
even the Emperor’s law can reach.”

“Treason!” she cried lightly. “The Emperor’s law reaches everywhere and
touches everything.”

He looked at her with a smile. “Do you think,” he said, “that the Emperor
wishes us two to be married?”

Her eyes dwelt fondly on his face, and she answered bravely:

“He wishes the old barriers to be utterly thrown down and all his people
to be one.”

The picture of that day at his father’s school when he had asserted his
manhood came back to him with a rush.

“Ah, yes,” he said soberly, “that is true. Perhaps it might have been,
but I spoiled it.”

“Thou?” she said, using again that fond expression that sent the blood
surging through him.

“I struck your brother,” he answered. “Perhaps but for that——”

“No, no!” she cried. “I know about that. It was right. There would have
been no hope if you had not done it. You do not know Kokan, how proud and
hard he is, how he despises fear. He thought you were afraid of him, and
he hated you for it. If you had not shown him you were not, and—and this
had come, he would have killed you.”

“Perhaps,” he said coolly.

His tone startled her. It was only a little, after all, that she knew of
men, and there was a side of Soichi that she did not suspect, because of
the difference in their training.

“Ah, but he would,” she declared earnestly. “You do not know how quick
and hot his temper is.”

“Perhaps I should have killed him,” Soichi answered. “It would have been
a fight, not a murder.”

The words surprised him almost as much as they did her, but for a
different reason. That he had said them to her was the wonder to him;
that he should have the feeling they disclosed was her amazement. It
was the spirit of the Samurai, the spirit that all her training told
her belonged only to them, and yet he revealed it as lightly as if it
were a thing of supreme indifference, a commonplace, the matter-of-fact
possession of every man. A new joy came to her with the unexpected
knowledge, and instantly new hope sprang up, vague and undefined, but
none the less profound. Somehow, some way this unimagined quality in him
would throw down the hateful barrier of prejudice and set them free.
There was a deepened tenderness in the eyes that answered his gaze.

“You said there would have been no hope if I had not done that,” he went
on, after a little. “Did you think Kokan would ever forgive that blow?”

“He is brave and true,” she answered softly, “even if he is proud and
scornful. Too brave himself not to admire bravery in another. He thought
you were afraid, but now he knows and in time his anger will die away.”

“You do not know him so well, I am afraid,” he said. “To be struck by one
he despised so much was an insult he will never forget or forgive. Hope,
for us, must count on something else, yet we must not be without hope.
You know the saying, ‘Even a calamity, if left alone three years, may
turn into a fortune.’”

She was strangely happy again. It seemed quite natural now that they
should face hopefully forward. She looked out over the shining sea and
began to build dreams, queer dreams that left the Now by unknown paths
and reached the Then by unmarked roads. But always they arrived there,
and it was a country of unclouded happiness where she and he lived in
perfect peace. A long time he sat silent, watching her with eyes that
signaled his mood. At length she turned to him with a little sigh.

“I must go home,” she said. “My father will say I stay very long at the
shrine and go very often.”

“So long a time and yet so short,” he said, and rose to his feet. An
unpleasant thought crossed his mind and she saw its shadow.

“What is it?” she asked.

“To-morrow the work at the bank begins,” he replied, “and I must go
there.”

“Well,” she said, “are you not glad of it? It is an honorable occupation.”

He gave her a puzzled, sorrowful look that brought a peal of merry
laughter.

“Is it so bad as that?” she asked.

“When I go to the bank I cannot come here,” he said gravely. “Then when
shall I see you?”

At once her own face fell. “You are here now,” she said, “and that was
enough. I did not think of to-morrow.”

“Not merely to-morrow,” he rejoined, “but all the days after that.”

“Two,” she answered lightly; “there will be always two in seven. We can
thank the new ways that have brought us Saturday and Sunday.”

“Yes, two in seven,” he responded, so gloomily that she laughed outright.

“Greedy!” she cried. “Know you not that the avaricious man prepares his
own downfall? How much better are two days than none, as it has been so
long?” She held up her slender fingers and made as if to count the years
he had been away. “And for the other days,” she went on, “there are paper
and ink and brushes, when one knows how to write.”

She was too happy at her new discovery of him to let so small a matter as
this conjure up clouds. He caught the contagion and her smile chased away
his frown.

“Good thought!” he said. “Now I know why that troublesome art was taught
me.”

So, laughing and jesting, they started down the hill. They had almost
reached the bottom when a new difficulty arose.

“If I send you a letter,” he said soberly, “will not Kudo-san know it?”

She had thought of that, too, only it did not disturb her.

“In the roof over the gate,” she said, “there is a split in the shingle.
Underneath one could easily leave a letter that would never be seen
unless someone should look for it.”

But he, more practical, at once objected. It would be tempting fate to
leave their letters where any day her father might so easily find them.
If he should chance to look over-closely at the gate, or perhaps to have
it repaired when a letter was there, discovery would be certain.

“If you do not enter the tiger’s den,” she said, “you cannot catch her
cub.”

“Oh, yes,” he answered; “if one is patient by and by the cub will come
out. There is a better place. In the corner of the yard by the plum tree
there is a big bamboo post in the angle of the fence. To-night, after
dark, I will make a cap for it, and in the hollow beneath shall be our
letter box.”

“Yes,” she said, “that is best.”

Satisfied of his skill and ingenuity she gave him her prettiest bow and a
radiant smile, and moved down the path toward Timber Street. He watched
until the far turn shut out from his view the dainty figure in its
silver-gray kimono and iris-violet _obi_, and then thoughtfully took his
own way homeward.

It was in the time of “Little Heat” when Soichi fitted the cap to the
post. So cleverly he did his work that no one could tell, except by the
closest examination, that there was a seam in the bamboo. On the inside
he made a deep groove in the post and fastened a tongue to the cap so
that it should fit tight always in the same place and never betray what
had been done. Often, after that, he would watch his chance and when no
one was in sight slip up to the post and stealthily lift the cap to take
out or put in a letter.

The days passed swiftly, in spite of his inability to see O-Mitsu, for
the work at the bank was new and hard, and as the business prospered
there was much for him to do. So _Handon_ and _Donkatu_ (half Sunday and
Sunday), as the country people still call them, came around more quickly
than he had thought, and nearly always they had contrived to arrange a
meeting. Oftenest it was at their favorite big rock back of the pines,
where there was seldom a straggling sight-seer to interrupt them. But
sometimes, on holidays and festivals, it would be at the big Buddhist
temple; and that they liked less, for the crowd interfered, and it was
difficult to find a secluded place or to have more than a few words
together without observation.

The weeks ran on into months, and the period of the “Cold Dew” came all
too quickly, with its short afternoons and early descending sun, that cut
down their brief hour together and sent them home to write more letters.
For the conversation of lovers is as never-ending in the Mikado’s realm
as in the less fettered courtships of happier lands, and there was always
so very much between them that had to be said and answered.

And now a new, dread subject was looming up. All over the land traveled
the same sinister whisper, and men said the Dragon was rousing himself,
and talked of the terrible rustling of his great scales. The winds of
war were beginning to blow lightly from the north, and far and near the
people waited anxiously to see if they could not be diverted. As time
went on, and stronger and stronger came the hostile currents, more and
more soberly Soichi and O-Mitsu discussed the darkening future. Much
it meant to them, for Soichi would be a soldier. His last birthday
had brought him to the age for conscription service, and although his
university course would give him some exemption, he was not one to claim
it, if the Emperor were engaged in deadly strife; nor indeed would
O-Mitsu have him. As autumn dipped into winter the wrath of the people
toward their great antagonist grew and deepened, and anxiety lest there
should be war gave place to desire for it.

They were sitting again by their great rock one late fall afternoon when
the grass was brown and dead, and through the bare branches that waved
above the housetops the wind blew bleak and cold from off a sullen sea.
They had talked of war and what it might bring to them. Each felt it
would be the end of all their dreams, for a soldier’s duty is to die for
the Emperor, and Soichi would not come back when once he had been called
to the front.

“It will be a very great honor for me,” he said at length, turning from a
long, silent look at the wide-stretching water.

She glanced up at him questioningly.

“It is the first time a Kutami has had the privilege of serving the
Empire as a soldier,” he went on, “and I shall be very proud to go. It
has done a great deal for us.”

She made no answer, but sat with her slender hands folded across her lap.

“Will you pray to Kwannon when I am gone?” he asked gravely.

“Yes, and to Shaka,” she said softly.

“Ah, to him also,” he returned; “yes, to him, too. We commit it all to
Shaka.”

The low-hanging sun warned them that their all-too-short hour was ended,
and they started down the familiar path in silence. At the turn, where
they separated, he paused, and she looked up into his eyes.

“To Shaka, too,” he said, and strode on.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




IX


There was plenty of work at the new bank, and Kutami divided his time
between it and his old affairs. In the street one morning as he was going
to the bank he came upon Chukei, the _nakodo_, of whom he had not a
thought since that day he saw him at Kudo-san’s gate.

“Good morning, Chukei-san,” he said; “what young people are you trying to
make happy now?”

“Not your son, surely,” answered the middleman, instantly scenting the
possibility of a fortunate stroke, and bowing very low to make a good
impression.

“Ho, ho!” cried Chobei, with a hearty laugh. “You are quite right. Surely
not my son. He has no thought of marrying yet.”

“Be not oversure,” replied the _nakodo_. “One never can tell what is in
the minds of these likely young fellows.”

“That is so,” returned the banker; “but I think I know my son quite
well enough. I saw you coming from Kudo-san’s house a while ago. That
must have been a proposal for his pretty daughter?” He chucked at his
shrewdness in guessing.

Chukei was not much inclined to discuss his clients’ affairs, but he was
tempted by the hope of gaining a new one, and besides, he loved a bit of
gossip.

“Yes,” he answered grinning sheepishly, “and a very good proposal it was,
too.”

“Indeed,” said Chobei, with neighborly interest. “I had not heard of the
wedding.”

“No, and you will not,” replied the matchmaker, a little sourly, for it
always angered him to think of the good business he had lost because of
O-Mitsu’s refusal. “My proposal was not accepted.”

“Dear me!” exclaimed Kutami; “that is very strange. Who was the man?”

“Yamamoto-san, the silk merchant,” responded the _nakodo_. “His son is
one of the finest young men in the city.”

“Yes, indeed,” said the banker, “I should think any man would be glad to
have his daughter make such a fortunate marriage. What did Kudo-san say?”

“That was the greatest surprise,” answered old Chukei. “He said his
daughter did not wish to marry.”

“Well, well!” cried the banker. “Who ever heard of a girl refusing to
marry when her father wished her too? Things have changed very much in
Japan when that can happen.”

“They have indeed,” replied the _nakodo_. “Least of all would one have
thought it of Kudo-san, but it is quite true. I have been there three
times since summer, each time with a very excellent marriage to offer,
and always it has been the same answer.”

“I wonder what the reason can be,” said the banker thoughtfully. “It is
certainly very strange. Good morning, Chukei-san,” and Chobei went on to
the bank, leaving the middleman quite uncertain whether he had made a
good investment of his gossip or not.

Jukichi’s neighbors had not missed the visits of the _nakodo_ to his
house, and as he had only one daughter and there was no wedding, it was
quite evident that several proposals for O-Mitsu had been rejected. It
was whispered about, in Lower Timber Street, that it was the girl herself
who had made the refusals. But if Jukichi had any regrets, they never
appeared. He loved the spirited girl and her gentle ways about the house,
and it mattered nothing to him if the neighborhood gossips talked of the
scandal of a girl who dared disclose a preference of her own contrary to
the wish of her father. Such a wonder might not be heard of again in all
Japan. He did not care. He enjoyed his home and his ease, and she was the
great factor in both.

Perhaps if he had been less fond, he might have been more suspicious. Yet
it had not occurred to the simple Samurai that there could be reasons
for his daughter’s hot distemper with the hopeful authors of Chukei’s
vicarious proposals other than her own demonstrative desire to remain in
the old home with him. The clever girl was shrewder than he guessed. But
who shall follow the blind trail of Love and pick out his footprints with
the certainty which may say, “There he stepped,” or “Here he stopped,” or
“See where he ran!”

There was lively interest in the house in Azalea Street that evening when
Chobei recounted his conversation with the _nakodo_. O-Koyo listened with
the kindly sympathy that ever kindles the matchmaking maternal heart. As
for Soichi, he heard with a growing feeling of impending disaster that
made it difficult for him to conceal his emotion. O-Mitsu had never told
him anything of this, and if she had been rejoiced at the discovery of
qualities in him which she had not anticipated, it was his turn to be
surprised at her ability to keep to herself a subject which she knew
would be so disquieting to him. He got out his little writing-box and
began a letter to her. O-Koyo sighed fondly as she glanced at the corner
where he sat with his ink and brush, busily covering a long roll of paper
with she knew not what words.

“Ah,” she said, “if only one of the proposals had been for Soichi
perhaps she would not have refused.”

“Hut!” cried her husband sharply. “Our son marry the daughter of
Kudo-san! What can you be thinking of?”

“Why not?” she replied quickly, undaunted by his scornful look. “Strange
things happen nowadays. Stranger than that have happened already, why not
again? We are rich and they are very poor.”

“Ah, yes,” returned Chobei soberly. “That is true. But money is not so
much yet, in Japan, and many more very strange things must come to pass
before it is. Besides, we are Eta and they Samurai.”

“No, no!” cried his wife, with unaccustomed daring; “we were Eta and they
were Samurai. Now all that is ended, and you have the best cause to know
it who were yourself associated so closely with this Kudo-san in the
school. To be sure we are only Commoners yet, but who knows what may not
come? If there should be war, what opportunities for advancement may it
not bring? One who can do for himself what you have done may do a great
deal more. Why should not you, or Soichi himself, win the promotion that
would make old Kudo-san glad to consent?”

She paused, excited and trembling, surprised at herself for making
so much argument against her husband. Chobei sat looking at her in
astonishment. Never before had she shown such feeling.

“Whatever is the world coming to,” he exclaimed at length, “when foolish
women can talk like that!”

He filled his little pipe and exhausted the pellet of tobacco almost at
one puff. But Soichi said nothing at all, and went on making his brush
fly like a dragon over the paper as if he had heard not a word of their
talk. O-Koyo said no more, and her husband smoked furiously, rapping
his pipe on the _hibachi_ to knock out the ashes, as if he meant to
smash it to pieces. At length Soichi rolled up his yards of affectionate
ideographs and slipped them deftly inside the long, narrow envelope, with
sprays of delicate pink cherry blossoms trailing over it. Then he went
out into the night and stole down to the corner of Kudo-san’s fence. Only
the plum-tree saw him slip the cap of the bamboo post and lay his love
letter carefully inside. Then he strode off toward the path up the hill.
His heart was in a tumult. Straight up to the old shrine he went, paused
a moment before it, and hurried on to their trysting-place at the big
rock. There he sat down, and a long time pondered the strange, exciting
news he had heard that evening. When he returned he found his father
still silently smoking rapid pipefuls and O-Koyo sitting beside him with
never a word, her hands busy with sewing. As he entered Chobei looked up
and asked:

“Where have you been?”

“I went out to walk,” answered Soichi, “and climbed up to the shrine on
the hill-top.”

Perhaps it was his talk with the _nakodo_, perhaps it was the suggestion
of his wife that had set Chobei to thinking definitely about the future
of his son. Theretofore there had been only a vague recognition of the
fact that sometime Soichi would marry. Now suddenly it came to him that
the boy was grown to man’s estate, that the condition he half dreaded,
half expected, was already come. With the realization came back the
mental picture of old Chukei. It was time to look about them, he thought,
to consider the possibility of finding a suitable mate for his promising
son, and, perhaps, to employ the middleman. After a time Chobei put aside
his pipe and began to speak of what he had been thinking. Soichi listened
like the dutiful son he was, and O-Koyo heard gladly, for even if it were
not to be the beautiful daughter of the Samurai, she would be happy to
see the son of whom she was so proud well married, and the daughter in
the house would make her cares much lighter. When at length there came a
pause in which Soichi could speak, it was with an air of quiet unconcern
that he said:

“But first I must do my service in the army. If war does come, perhaps
there will be no need for Chukei-san.”

Then, because they were alone in their own privacy, where no outside
eye or ear might see or hear, and it was not necessary to conceal their
genuine emotions, they gave full rein to the expression of their sober
feelings, and the mother, who would be proudly scornful of tears or
outward show of grief if the time should come to send her boy to the
hardships and hazards of camps and battlefields, gave the hot, protesting
drops unheeded flow. But Soichi showed the mettle that was in him,
saying calmly:

“But if the Emperor wishes it!”

Reverently the Commoner and his wife bowed at the mention of that name
and the suggestion of his possible desire. There was no more loyal
family in all his realm than they, and if he needed the sacrifice of all
they had, and life itself, they had only to know his need to make the
offering. The proudest opportunity life held was to die for him, and it
was with heartfelt acquiescence that they heard their son add:

“Then I should be sorry that I had only one life to give him.”

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




X


“Three times, he told my father, he had made offer of marriage for you,
and each time it was refused.”

Soichi looked down upon her where she sat by the big rock, and his black
eyes shone with a great tenderness. She did not look up, but gazed away
toward the sea and made no reply. All the time since she had read his
letter she had wondered what to say to him. For she had wished earnestly
that he might not know. There was trouble enough already for them, and it
could do no good to tell him. It could only add to his disquiet, and as
it was they seldom met without some shadow of their specter falling over
them. So she meant to bear this alone, and if by and by the barriers were
destroyed, then it would add to their joy. But now it had come, through
the foolish gabble of old Chukei. She looked up at him standing there, so
strong and manly, and the sadness she saw smote her heart.

“Three times,” he repeated.

The old roguish smile came into her eyes. “But none of them was from a
banker,” she said softly.

As always, she had only to seem merry to drive away his sober mood, and
now the light-hearted answer brought its quick smile in return.

“But why did you not tell me?” he demanded.

“Thou art dull, Big One,” she answered, “to ask me such questions. Surely
thou must have guessed.”

“I am not quick with riddles,” he said.

Manlike he had but one way. He must know it all and she must tell. The
intuition that would have conjured up the whole scene for her was
utterly lacking in him, and as she watched him, she saw the shadow settle
on his brow that warned her of his shifting mood.

“For one,” she said quickly, “how could I tell when you were not here,
and thought so little of me you had not even told me where you were?”

He did not understand, and she laughed at his puzzled look. Then he saw.

“So long ago,” he said, “before I came home?”

“Is it so very long?” she asked. “I do not remember. It seemed but
yesterday I saw you here. How many years is it, man to whom it has been
so long?”

He gazed at her bewildered. He was no match for her at such fencing of
wits. He flung himself down beside her and said shortly:

“Have the kindness to explain, if you please. Do you not see how I am
tortured?”

“No, no!” she cried, “not that! Were they not all refused? For what are
you tortured? Ah, if you had been a woman you would have been taught
in childhood how foolish it is to admit jealous thoughts. Well, then,
since you insist so much, the first one was refused—I did not know why.
My father gave me my wish and I said No. Then one day I went to visit an
old shrine I love very much, and I found out why. After that, with the
others—there was no other reason. Now is the torture ended?”

He turned to her and the smile in his eyes was complete reward. “I am
very glad,” he said.

“And very foolish,” she added softly.

“I wished very much to know,” he said after a pause. “To-morrow I am
summoned to the temple for examination.”

“To-morrow!” she cried. She knew it was to come but had not thought it
was so near. “To-morrow!” she repeated, whispering, as if to herself.
“Are you glad to go? Perhaps you will not be taken.”

“Nay,” he said, “if there is war I shall be glad and proud, and if there
is no war the time will soon be ended.”

“Very soon,” she said demurely, and made as if counting on her fingers.
“When a few months may seem so many years how long will three years be?”

“Long enough for more refusals,” he answered, and she laughed at the
retort.

“But it is by lot that they are chosen,” she said, “and it may not fall
on you.”

He smiled fondly at her eagerness and innocence. “Yes, by lot,” he
answered. “But your Samurai policemen know well where to make the lots
fall.”

She knew what he meant. Young men as tall and sturdy as he did not
escape, even though the selection was by chance. There was a keen-eyed,
patriotic, military intelligence that supervised the casting of the lots,
and the girl, who gloried in his strength, foresaw the certainty that
he would be chosen. Nor was he, in truth, unwilling to go. If it should
happen that the wheel of the lottery left him free to stay at home, as it
did some quite as fit as he for service, he would accept the result with
a clean conscience. For brief and infrequent as were his opportunities
for seeing O-Mitsu, even they would be lost if he were in the army. Thus
far his loyalty and sense of duty to the empire let him go. Before the
lots were drawn he could hope that they would miss him. When the decision
was made, if he were taken he would set his heart to his work with a
will and devotion no tie of home, no merely personal consideration, would
ever cause to waver for an instant. And of all who knew and loved him
none would urge him on more eagerly than the girl. She was looking at
him proudly as he sat before her, and it came to her that he was of the
build and stature sought for throughout the empire for the distinguished
regiments which had the honor of bearing the imperial name.

“You will go to the Guards,” she said.

“Oh, no,” he answered quickly; “I could not hope for such an honor.”

“Honor!” she said with a smile. “It will be an honor to the Guards to
have such a soldier.”

That was too much and he laughed at the joke. “But I am not a soldier,”
he protested.

“You will be,” she answered confidently. “There are some things about
you, Big One, which you do not know yourself, but I know. Come, it is
time to go. You must drink no sake to-night, and sleep well, to be ready
for the examination.”

There was plenty of company for Soichi at the temple the next morning.
All the young men of his age in the district had been summoned, and there
was a clatter of eager talk among them as they awaited their turns with
the examiners. But Soichi had little to say. He heard with amusement
the boastful words of some who knew themselves to be at the threshold
of distinction and honor, and he had a strange sympathy for some who
hoped to escape. For himself, a night of agitated reflection, sleepless
in spite of O-Mitsu’s parting injunction, had brought him a day of calm
indifference. He was ready for whatever might come. The businesslike
surgeon, working rapidly but carefully, pronounced his verdict with
prompt decision, and one after another was set free or sent on to the
recruiting captain. At length it was Soichi’s turn. The brusque doctor’s
eyes glistened as he saw the rippling muscles of the broad shoulders, and
an exclamation of professional pleasure broke from his lips as he caught
the rhythmic note of the deep breathing.

“Lungs like a bellows,” he cried to his assistant.

Weight, height, and measurements were quickly taken, and with an
enthusiasm he had not displayed in many a day the surgeon called to the
recording sergeant:

“_Ichiban_” (first-class).

Already Soichi knew his fate. His university degree would take the place
of the recruiting captain’s mental examination, and after that there
would be only the certainty of the lots. It did not take the captain
long to repeat the surgeon’s “_Ichiban_,” and as Soichi turned away from
giving his record at the desk, he heard the recruiting officer say to the
inspector major, who had just come in:

“There is one for the Guards. Just look at him.”

O-Mitsu’s judgment was confirmed, and he went home to await the notice of
his selection, and to write perhaps his last letter to her. For he would
not dare to write to her home when he was away, and they had no friend
whom they would trust with their secret. It was a sober letter. There
seemed little chance now that war would be avoided. Already men said that
the throat of the Dragon had been touched, and throughout the Empire
preparations were going on rapidly for the time when he should strike.

With simple directness Soichi told his news, and spoke proudly of the
intimation he had had that he should go to the Guards. There would be a
few weeks of drill and preliminary work, he supposed, in the barracks
at division headquarters in the near-by city, and it might be that once
or twice more he should have the opportunity of seeing her before he
went to Tokyo to join his regiment. After that would come the war and
the battlefield. She would know he did not say it to boast, but he meant
to do a soldier’s duty. It would have been sweet, it there had been no
war (he spoke of it as if it were already begun), to live on there with
her, for in some way it would have worked out for them. But that was
impossible now; a dream to be forgotten. The dearest wish of his heart
was to die for the Emperor, and he prayed only that Shaka would permit
him to meet his fate gloriously and with honor.

That was all. Not a word to her of the love that filled his heart. Not
a message of hope or farewell, not a hint of constancy or patience. All
that was behind him. His duty lay to the future and to the grim chance of
war.

It was a raw, cold night, with a bitter wind searching through the bare
branches of the plum tree, and Soichi shivered as he lifted the cap of
the bamboo post and thrust in his letter. Then he patted the cap back
into place and turned away, nor noticed that a telltale corner of the
envelope projected through the joint he had not closed tightly. And of
all the evenings in the year, that was the one Jukichi chose to visit the
plum tree.

Next day the notification came. Soichi had been selected for immediate
service and was to go to the Guards. His record in the military work
at school was such that the preliminary training at adjacent division
headquarters would be waived and he would report directly to his
regiment. He would start the following day.

He went to the bank and finished up his work there in preparation for
indefinite absence. Then he wrote a little note to O-Mitsu, telling her
the orders he had received, and started home. The early winter evening
had fallen before he reached the house in Timber Street, and he stopped
at the bamboo post to leave his note and perhaps to find a letter from
her. He lifted the cap with excited eagerness and felt in the hollow.
There, sure enough, was a letter. He took it out with thumping heart and
dropped in his own; then hurried around the corner home, impatient for
light to read her words.

The first glance at the envelope sent a queer sensation of coldness
through his heart, as if he had suddenly been struck chill. The writing
was strange. The delicate characters of O-Mitsu, beautiful as the work
of a famous artist, were replaced by the strong, heavy, brush strokes of
an angry man. For an instant he stared at them with mind a blank. Then
he knew. Someone had found them out. He stood as if paralyzed by shock,
nerveless, inert, expecting some dire calamity. Then he tore open the
envelope.

A single glance was sufficient to tell the story. The signature was the
first thing his eye caught, and after that he could hardly see the other
words. Those two dominated everything—“Kudo Jukichi”—her father! The
new-clothed dignity of the law that made him a Commoner slipped from him
like a kimono unfastened; the honor of his new service, the pride of his
regimental assignment faded away, and he was again the Eta of the old
days, outcast, despised, a very pollution. All that he had done, all
that his father had done, the position they had won in the community,
the consideration of their fellows were made as nothing by the simple
apparition of those two words.

But after a little the old inborn pride of race came back to him and
he straightened up like a new man. He was one of whom the Emperor had
deigned to think; what should he care what others said? What mattered
it after all that her father had learned their secret? Nothing but that
was changed, and sooner or later that must have come. He had done no
wrong. He was not changed. The law that had given him citizenship was
still the law. The Emperor’s care was over him. It was his Sovereign’s
wish that he was what he was. He took new heart and began to read the
letter. His brain was cooler now. In the mental numbness that followed
the first shock he had felt only a vague terror of the fury of Kudo. But
as he read, the words that had seemed so awful in anticipation lost some
of their dreaded force. The wild outburst of rage was not there, but in
its place a cool, fine sarcasm that cut as if the Samurai who wrote had
wielded his sword instead.

A curious calm possessed him as he finished the letter. The haughty pride
of the Samurai, his bitter contempt for the “outcast” who dared presume
to think of his daughter, his jeers at the “upstart trader” had lost
their sting. It was a soldier of the Empire, a man of the Guards, who
folded the letter and replaced it in its envelope. With a smiling face he
met his father and mother and sat down to supper.

After the meal, when the pipes were brought out, he handed the letter
to his father to read. It might as well be told now. His poor little
secret, stripped of its veil, seemed very small and miserable. But he
was going away to-morrow, and unknown to-morrow might do what it would
with him. He listened unmoved while Chobei slowly read aloud the bitter,
mocking words of the man for whom he had done so much. O-Koyo covered
her face with her kimono sleeves and wept openly; but father and son sat
with steady features and gave no sign, save that when the reading was
ended the Commoner laid his strong arm across his son’s shoulder in shy,
unaccustomed caress, and said:

“My son! My son!” No more.




[Illustration]




XI


“The bee stings the weeping face,” they say in Japan, and Soichi proved
the truth of the proverb. It was a queer little procession that formed at
the house in Azalea Street to escort him to the railroad station whence
the train was to bear him away to a soldier’s life. A dismal rain was
sifting down from the sodden clouds that seemed to hang just above the
housetops. But the banner that set forth his name and the fact of his
service was borne none the less proudly by his old schoolmates, and the
friend who carried the small bundle of his treasured belongings held
his head none the less erect because he strode through muddy streets.
Already the Dragon was beginning to roar, and his voice rang from end to
end of the land. It was a last farewell these friends were taking of the
young soldier, and they honored him and envied the glory he would win.
There was nothing to say. In silence the little company walked along. But
as they passed the dilapidated old house in Timber Street, where the plum
tree stood bare and desolate in the corner of the yard, Soichi, daring
a hasty glance, raised his eyes for an instant to the balcony under the
gable end. Just for a moment he looked, but that was enough to set his
heart a-thumping as it had not done for many a day. For in that instant
he caught, at a parting of the _shoji_ (paper windows), a glimpse of a
beautiful face and the flash of eyes undimmed by tears, that sent him a
message of cheer and hope and constancy. His heart was strangely light
as he trudged along behind his banner, and though the rain fell never so
hard it was a day of sunshine for him.

Then came the weary miles of railway and the army. In the car he met some
others going up to join his regiment, and talk of peace and war beguiled
the miles until at last the train pulled into Tokyo and in a few minutes
Soichi was in barracks. The proverb of the bee and the weeping face came
home to him when he was assigned to the company in which Kudo Kokan was a
lieutenant, the old Kokan with the hot heart and ready insolence he knew
so well.

“_Shikata-ga-nai_” (it can’t be helped), said Soichi, and set himself to
do his work with all his heart, as becomes a member of the Guards.

Fortunately for him there was much to do and not much time which
Lieutenant Kudo could devote to personal animosity.

“Ha, the Commoner!” he cried with fine scorn when he first saw Soichi.

The young soldier wondered what would come next, but it was drill hour,
and Kokan had no chance for private spleen. He was hampered now by the
service, and the near, sure approach of war. It would not have surprised
Soichi to see the lieutenant swing his sword in execution of the revenge
he doubted not had been cherished all the years since that day at school.
But he did not comprehend fully as yet the restrictions that hedged
Kokan, and that first taunt of “Commoner” gave no clew. It was strange,
he thought, that the lieutenant had not said “Eta,” but the hours of
“goose step” and drill that followed left him no time to think of other
things. He had been adept at such work in his school, but now he found
that the intervening years had cost him much in facility and precision,
and it was hard work to be always ready for the sharp command, to make
himself again the machine needed for perfection. When it was over and he
got back to barracks, he was tired out, ready enough for his rice and
fish, and after that for his blankets. When he thought again of Kokan’s
taunt, there came to him also the recollection of his defense at the
school and he understood. It had been passed over lightly then that he
had accused Kokan of insulting the Emperor, but in the army it might not
go so easily again. It would be indeed a serious charge for an officer
to face. It made the boy smile as he recognized the new bridle on his
lieutenant’s insolence.

He understood now, also, that there would be no attempt at actual
violence. For himself he did not fear. Man to man, with equal arms, he
was ready to meet Kokan at any time. He dreaded disgrace far more than
death, and if Kokan should attack him the dishonor would affect also the
lieutenant and all his family, and that meant that O-Mitsu would suffer.
So he saw with deep relief the bearing of his officer, so different to
what he had expected.

In scores of ways, however, the lieutenant found occasion to give Soichi
a taste of his quality, and it was apparent that Kokan had been informed
how matters stood at home. His first detail to guard duty brought Soichi
a test. He had had time to canvass the whole situation and had reached
his decision. He was a soldier of the Emperor and war was coming on.
He would do his full duty always to the very utmost and no personal
distraction or injury should deflect him. He would bear the injustice of
Kokan without complaint, hoping only to win release by an honorable death
in battle. But if the persecution became more than he could endure he
would kill Kokan and himself.

From a course thus deliberately mapped out he was not the man to be
easily turned, and so he was ready when Kokan came by, inspecting the
posts, and greeted him with:

“So _hinin_!” (not human, outcast).

He brought his rifle sharply to salute, and held his head erect and his
eyes steadily front as if he had not heard the insult or the instant
correction to “_heimin_” (Commoner) of the cautious lieutenant. With
searching eyes Kokan looked him up and down, examined his rifle and
equipment, but could find no flaw. Then he demanded the orders and
listened intently as Soichi repeated without a slip the instructions he
had received. With a sinister smile the baffled officer passed on, and
his victim knew that was only the beginning.

There was a different sort of smile on Soichi’s face as he thought how
his lieutenant had tried to catch him.

“If he keeps that up,” he said to himself, “it will make me the best
soldier in the regiment to be always ready for him.” He nearly laughed
aloud at the idea. “I might even win promotion. How angry he would be at
that!”

The warning was valuable. Soichi kept himself ever on the alert, but in
his heart he began to despise the Samurai. It was a petty, dishonorable
trick he had played, saying _hinin_ and then correcting himself. Kudo-san
would never do such a thing, he thought, and how O-Mitsu’s pretty lips
would curl in scorn if she knew. There was compensation, after all, for
what he must endure. If he kept his own honor unstained Kokan could do
him no real harm.

The days wore on with many little stratagems of Kokan to catch the
Commoner napping. But Soichi, always vigilant, escaped. The endless
preparations for active service hurried along and there began to be talk
of the regiment being moved to a naval base, ready for transport oversea.

Suddenly from end to end a great hush fell over the land. It was as if
the nation were crouching, ready to leap and holding its breath as it
waited only the word to spring. War had come, and all men knew. The
gossip ceased that had filled minds and mouths, and men went to and fro
in solemn, awesome silence. Still there was no outward show, and the
stranger who looked on with inexperienced eyes saw only the old round of
trade and work and cheerful amusement, with never an indication of the
dreadful business at last undertaken.

Then came the first sign. From mouth to mouth the whisper ran—the
Reserves were summoned to the colors. From never a house to which the
fateful finger pointed came there a sound of grief or dismay. Gladly,
quickly, but in silence and in the night the men responded. In twos and
threes they took their way to their meeting-places and few they were who
saw or heard. Town and city wore their placid air of peace. Even the
winds of war, that had blown so roughly over the land, were stilled, as
in ghostly stealth the nation answered the call.

In the middle of the night Soichi found himself in full kit marching
swiftly to the station. No banners waved, no bands blared, no trumpets
sounded. No throngs of eager friends gathered to give the men farewell.
No loyal cheers encouraged them and urged them to duty’s task. Through
empty, silent streets, between houses barred and darkened, in the hush
of a march to the grave, the regiment passed to the waiting trains.
Noiselessly the men climbed into the cars and only the hushed, brief
orders of the officers broke the stillness. No ring of bell or scream of
whistle marked their departure. Morning dawned over a city ignorant of
what had been done, and only the Reservists coming to the empty barracks
knew that the forward movement had begun.

In the corner of his car Soichi threw off his heavy pack and curled
himself up in his great-coat. Near him no man spoke. In silent peace
they lay wrapped in their own thoughts or already soundly asleep. Ahead,
toward the center of the car, a little group gathered around the glow of
their cigarettes and talked in subdued, but excited whispers. So they
rumbled off down the road through the darkness, headed toward War.

With a tranquil mind Soichi lay in his comfortable corner and thought of
what had happened and what was to come. He had no fear of the future.
His only anxiety was lest he should fail unwittingly or his opportunity
should not come. He belonged to the Empire. It had made him all he was,
and now that it needed him he would give it cheerfully all he had of
muscle, brain, or life. He had no expectation of coming back. That day he
had written his parents his last good-by. He calmly and fully expected to
die on the field, and was concerned only to make his death count for the
most he could. He wondered how the end would come, and hoped it would be
in the first line of battle.

Yet not all the men would be killed! He knew that in the last war, when
he was a boy, only a few, comparatively, died. By far the majority of
them came back. What if it should be his fate to go through the dangerous
trial and come out unscathed! The human heart within him leaped at the
thought, and his mind came back with a start to the letter from O-Mitsu
he had received only that afternoon. He smiled now at his surprise in
getting it. He had not thought it possible that she could write to
him. In his inability to send letters to her it seemed, of course, she
could not reach him. He had even thought she did not know where he was.
Kokan must have written home about the new member of his company and
unconsciously given her the information he, most of all, would have
withheld. Soichi laughed at the thought of such a trick for fate to play
on the imperious lieutenant.

There the letter was now, safe in his pocket, and he felt again, as he
touched it, the thrill with which he had read her good-by; the simple
straightforward statement of her unchanging love for him, and how, after
her father’s discovery of his letter, there had been a scene of terrible
anger; how she had braved him with the point of her dagger at her heart
and told him she would never marry. The man for her was a soldier, as
befitted the daughter of a Samurai, and now her soldier was going away
to die for his country and hers. So then, good-by. He was a soldier and
would do a soldier’s duty.

Yes, he would do a soldier’s duty, he had no doubt of that. But suppose
after doing it to the utmost limit, life should still remain? Ah, that
would be the last crowning stroke of cruel fate. Even her constancy held
out no promise to him. The honor he coveted waited in a sable cloak on
some unknown battlefield. He shut his heart to other hope.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




XII


The winter wind whistled drearily through the rigging as the transport
came to anchor, and the men shivered with cold in spite of their heavy,
fur-lined coats. The business of war was begun in earnest now, and Soichi
and his fellows bustled about the ship making the final preparations
for debarkation. At last, with kits tightly packed and every article
carefully stowed, so that nothing should be lost, they stumbled down the
gangway and into the boats. The transport lay far off from the shallow
beach and it was a long hard pull for the shore. A great bonfire was
their beacon, for they were landing late at night, and the search lights
of the war ships that had convoyed them lighted up their course. With
his cap pulled down on his head as far as it would go and the fur collar
of his overcoat turned up about his ears, Soichi stood wedged among his
mates. The keel touched and into the icy water they plunged waist-deep to
wade ashore.

That was but the foretaste. They stood around the fire they soon had
blazing, warming their aching feet, drying their clothes, and talking of
what was ahead. They had said good-by to transportation. Now the miles
they had to cover would be made on their feet, and many a man looked
ruefully at the heavy, unaccustomed boots and wondered how he should
endure the march. Soichi found his muscles put to a new test. It was one
thing to drill for hours in the barracks square and quite another to
march for hours along a frozen road carrying his heavy kit.

It was bitter cold, far colder than he had ever known it in Japan, and
the big fur-lined overcoat, although it kept his body warm, hampered his
legs in walking and made him very weary. It was with the utmost effort,
when he went on sentry duty after a hard day on the road, that he could
keep awake, and he thought regretfully that he was not doing his full
duty, because only the fear that Kokan would catch him kept his eyes from
closing.

No, it was not at all like barrack life. There the rice and fish and
pickles were always ready when the day’s work was done, but often now
they had to wait for hours, far into the night sometimes, for the big
kettles to come up and the rice to be boiled. And now there was no sake.
Such supplies as that could not keep up with the march, and though
occasionally some of his comrades managed to get a bottle of beer or two
from some terrified Korean as they passed or camped in a village, Soichi
dared not risk it. It was only another chance for Kokan.

That young man busied himself with seemingly increasing vigor, watching
to trap his victim in any slip. But day by day he saw Soichi’s own
prediction being verified, and the sturdy young fellow becoming always
a better soldier, until other officers began to remark it and Kokan was
obliged to conceal his wrath under a smiling assent.

They left many weary miles behind, and now excitement began to grow
among the men, for each day brought them perceptibly nearer the enemy
and the actual clash of arms. Daily the rumors from ahead grew in size
and portent. The scouts were in contact with the enemy’s advance. There
had been a brush. The first shots had been exchanged, and the sight of
two or three wounded men carried by on stretchers set the whole regiment
to shouting “_Banzai!_” and put fresh vigor into their steps. They sang
the war songs they had learned in barracks back in Tokyo, the precentors
striding along at the side of the column chanting the lines, and the
whole regiment roaring them out after the leaders.

They were going over the ground from which the men of their regiment,
now awaiting their call in the Second Reserves, had helped to drive the
scrambling Chinese in the war that had been the forerunner of this one.
Every day brought them to some new point of interest that set tongues to
wagging with increasing volubility and gave new impetus to the march.
Each night the kindly surgeon looked them over and gave a helpful bit of
advice here, and a friendly word of warning there, showed how to bathe
and bandage the blistered feet or massage the aching limbs, added sober
caution about the use of water and told how to avoid taking cold.

So half the long march was covered. Far ahead, they knew, was the wide
river where the enemy was expected to make his determined stand. There
would be their first battle, and they pressed on toward it eagerly as
toward the goal of a life’s ambition. But one morning, when the regiment
had the head of the column, all unexpectedly the sound of rifle fire a
little ahead drifted back to them, and immediately the order to double
brought a roaring cheer as they sprang forward. The enemy had made a
dash with cavalry, and the advanced guard was checked. Up they swept
with flashing eyes, hot for the fight. Through Soichi’s brain whirled a
wild vision of a charge in the face of the foe and the heavy pack grew
lighter as he rushed forward. But it was no charge. Deployed under cover
of a long stone wall they had barely tasted the joy of using their rifles
when the enemy fled, leaving behind only four or five of his dead to
mark the place of his defeat. It was hardly a skirmish, but it served
to fire the blood of the men, and serenely they promised to wipe out the
disappointment when at last the great day should come.

The winter wore away and spring came on. Still they were tramping
steadily toward the river. Work was much easier now that they had settled
into it, and they made more miles with less waste of energy. The grass
turned green in the valleys, and along the streams the first wild flowers
put forth their blossoms. Fur-lined greatcoats gave place to wool, and
with these rolled on the shoulders instead of flapping about the legs the
men stepped along lightly and gayly.

Now they learned a new exercise. Hardly would they get into camp before
half of them would be turned out for instruction in field intrenchment.
The short-handled shovel Soichi carried strapped to the side of his
knapsack was not very large, but he learned how to dig a wide, deep hole
with it in remarkably short time. Morning after morning as they moved on
toward the north they left beside their camp ground proof of their work
in samples of the different kinds of trenches they might come to need in
the field.

They saw very little of the enemy. After that one brief clash he seemed
unwilling to venture another encounter and kept out of the way, except
that now and then a little group of his horsemen appeared for a few
minutes on some far-off hill. It was march and dig and sleep, and do it
all over again. But all the time they were nearing the river, and at
last, when they had been almost two months on the road, they came to the
range of bold hills that flanked the stream and concealed the enemy’s
country from their view.

Here they camped several days. The scouts and advanced guards had driven
the Russians back to the islands in the stream and the near shore was
their own. But before they could go over the range and down into the town
that lay in the pockets of the hills on the river bank, another kind of
work was to be done. In little squads they scoured the near-by country
with axes and ropes and brought in great bundles of pine boughs from
the scrub-covered hills, and piles of mats and long cornstalks from the
huts. Then at night they crossed the hills and flanked the river side of
the road with tall screens which shut off the view of the enemy’s scouts
on the high cross-river ridges. Where the way led straight toward his
camps they built huge arches, whose broad tops made a great curtain that
covered the road entirely. Then, sheltered by arches and screens, so that
no enemy could tell their strength, they marched on into the town and
were quartered once more in comfortable houses. Soichi dropped his pack
with strange exaltation. When they left this place it would be to go to
battle, and perhaps that fight would bring the opportunity he desired.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




XIII


It was ten o’clock the second night in town, and Soichi had been asleep
in his warm red blankets two hours or more when the sergeant shook him
awake and told him to get up. He was to take rifle and cartridge belt and
follow, making no noise. In the darkness he joined a squad of his mates
and saw Omori, Ito, and two or three others of his friends, all equipped
as he was. Presently an officer came up and Soichi recognized Kokan. He
saw the lieutenant give him a sharp look, and heard him mutter something
he did not understand. Then without a word Kokan strode away and the
sergeant told them to come on. Nothing had been said of the duty, but
Soichi knew it was not sentry-go and guessed they were going scouting.

In silence broken only by the muffled footsteps on the soft earth they
followed Kokan to the river’s edge. A man with a boat was waiting and
they stepped in softly, careful to make no noise. The man stood up, and
with his long oar skillfully and silently drove the boat out into the
stream.

In a whisper the order was passed to load magazines, but not to fire
except to avoid capture. The hard, metallic click of a magazine spring
betrayed the haste of one of the men in shoving his cartridge home. In
the ghostly stillness it came like the crack of a rifle and brought a
sharp whisper from Kokan:

“Kutami, was that you?”

But Soichi had thought of that and muffled his magazine with his blouse
so that no sound came from it.

“Even here!” he thought, surprised. “Will he forget his duty to think of
me now? Well, he shall have no just complaint.”

Softly the boat came up to the bank of the island, and noiselessly the
men made their way to land. Then, while they gathered about him in a
ring, Kokan whispered their instructions. They were to spread out and
endeavor to get by the Russian outposts concealed in the clumps of
willows that dotted the island, to work across to the next stream, note
the width of the island and the character of the ground, the number of
the outposts of the enemy they saw and their position. They had three
hours for the work. At the end of that time they must be back at the
boat. Any who did not return would be left to get back to camp as best
he could. They must estimate the time, and in no case strike matches to
consult watches. Kokan asked each man if he understood, and when all
replied that they did he sent them away one by one. Then he himself
started straight across the island alone.

Soichi had the downstream end of the line. It was a bad time for such
work, one of those blue-black nights when the stars shine with multiplied
brilliance, and the white sand of the island was a dangerous background
for their dark uniforms. He took a long look at the heavens to select
a guide and then pushed away from the bank, and, crouching stealthily,
walked with long steps directly toward a single willow that stood a few
yards inshore. There he paused and took stock of his situation. Off to
his right he saw dimly a dark figure crawling across the sand. It was one
of his comrades, and he realized what a telltale his uniform was. With
sudden resolve he took it Off, and smiled to see how his gray flannels
matched the sand. Then he pulled off his boots, and with only his rifle
and shells started on. He walked upright, with the rifle held close by
his side, and moved as fast as he could. His soldier’s instinct warned
him to avoid the clumps of trees and bushes, and from tree to tree that
stood alone he worked his way. A queer fancy struck him to count his
steps the better to estimate the distance he traveled, but he soon found
that it distracted his attention from his work. So he changed his plan,
and at each pause under a bush calculated its distance from the last and
mentally kept the sum of the whole. To reckon the time was the hardest,
and after a little he gave up guessing at that. He would do his work
first and let the time take care of itself.

[Illustration: He saw dimly a dark figure.]

Suddenly as he sat resting and thinking under cover of a thick willow,
he heard a sound that seemed close at his left. With every sense alert
he gazed in the direction whence it came, and waited. Presently it was
repeated, and now he recognized a man’s voice, husky and guttural from
the unsuccessful effort to whisper. He lay face down on the sand to
muffle his heart, for it seemed that the enemy surely must hear its
beating. Then as he watched he saw a match struck in a clump of willows
scarcely forty yards away, and presently caught the glow of a lighted
cigarette. Soon another and another appeared, and then their aroma came
faintly to him across the night. Three men awake, he thought; did that
mean a dozen in the post? He wasted no time in guessing, but flat on his
face wriggled away across the sand. He was inside the line of outposts
now, and when he had crawled a long distance and put some bushes between
himself and the men he had so nearly run into, he rose and walked rapidly
forward.

He had advanced what he calculated to be nearly a mile from the boat, and
thought he must be nearing the stream he was seeking. The ground became
less sandy and there were fewer trees and bushes. He thought it unlikely
that the Russians would have more outposts there. He had almost concluded
to make a run for it to the river, when a rifle shot to his right and
behind him sent him flat to the ground in breathless suspense. Someone
had been discovered! Other shots followed, and then a fusillade that
sounded like that morning brush when he had first heard fire. He crawled
to the nearest bush and lay still.

No bullets whistled his way and he heard no reports from the rifles of
his men. The fire was all Russian, and he hoped it was only a scare and
that his men had got away. Then he saw that the firing was extending
toward the river, and the reports of Japanese rifles mingled in the
sound. They were caught back there, and his heart stood still at the
thought that the success of the night’s work might depend on him. From
the direction in which the firing came he thought the Russians must be
near his boat. Perhaps his party were all cut off and killed, or worse
than that, captured.

The firing ceased, and he lay under his bush and wondered what to do. He
remembered that he had not yet reached the river, and he rose and ran
swiftly forward. Soon he caught the gleam of water, and in a moment was
at the bank. He lay down and went over his calculation of the distance
he had come. Then he looked up at the stars, marked out his course, and
started back.

He knew the location of one outpost, and he thought at first his best
chance was to go as close to it as he had come. But he reflected that
all the sleeping men must have been roused by the firing, and that if
they had discovered the boat they would watch to see if any of the
scouting party came back to it. No, he must go another way and swim the
stream. But he wanted his uniform. He dreaded what would be said to him
if he went back without it. How to get it was the question. The aroused
Russians were between him and the bush where it lay.

The fire had not extended much to his right and he judged that the line
of outposts did not reach far that way. He turned sharply downstream and
moved as rapidly as he dared. At times, when the way was open, he ran;
but in the bushes it was slow work. At last he ventured to turn back
toward his own shore. Cautiously he made his way until the soft lap of
the water on the bank caught his ear. Here was the stream. Should he
strike in, or try for the uniform? He wondered how long he had been on
the island. It might be an hour, it might be two. The night was yet far
from spent. A low ridge of sand ran parallel with the bank, shutting
the stream from his sight. He moved stealthily to the river side of it
and made up his mind to go after his uniform. The ridge would guide him
to the bush where it lay, and if worse came to worst a quick leap would
take him into the water and he would trust to the darkness to escape the
Russian lead.

At first he walked upright, near the water, and traveled rapidly. Then as
he approached the point where he judged the Russians might be, he came
close under the ridge and crawled on hands and knees. It was ticklish
work, and the rifle bothered him badly. Not a sound came to his alert
ears. By and by he wriggled to the top of the ridge and peered over.
After a time he thought he could make out the willows where the smokers
had been. His own bush was not far off now and he crawled on.

A new thought stopped him like a blow. Suppose the Russians had found his
clothes and were waiting for him to come for them. That was a matter to
be considered, and he pondered it seriously for some time. Then he went
on. He would take the chance. Keeping the ridge between himself and it
he crawled opposite the bush and lay a long time listening intently. He
was so near he thought he could hear the breathing of any man waiting,
and knew he would hear a movement. Not a sound came from the bush, and
at length he ventured on. It was but an instant’s work to gather up
trousers, blouse, and boots and scuttle back over the ridge.

One foot was in a trouser leg when he stopped. The river was wide and
swift. It would be hard enough to swim as he was, and the thick uniform
would hamper him terribly. He thought it over a moment, then swiftly
rolled up blouse and boots and tied them with the trouser legs in a
bundle at the back of his neck. Then he slung his rifle across his back
and waded in. The water was icy cold, but he moved slowly lest he make a
noise and arouse some Russian. He was up to his waist and almost ready
to strike out when an unlucky step brought his foot down on a stone that
turned and he stumbled forward with a loud splash.

Instantly there came a hoarse, Russian shout from up the stream and he
ducked. As he went down he heard the loud report of a rifle and felt the
wind of a bullet over his head. He plunged forward and swam rapidly out
and downstream. Low in the water, with head as far down as he could keep
it, he put all his strength into his strokes. Behind him the Russians
along the shore fired as if charged by an army. The bullets sang over his
head and hissed in the water beside him. He heard the roar of the rifles
and the shouts of the men, and tried to dive, but under water the bundle
and rifle held him back, and he gave that up.

Gradually the firing slackened, and when it ceased he judged by the
current that he was in mid-stream. He was very tired now, and very cold.
He began to fear he could not get across. But the thought of the disgrace
of failure after all he had done nerved him for fresh effort. He had the
information the party had been sent to get, and it might be that none of
the others had secured it. He must go on. In spite of his exertion the
cold was agonizing. His bones ached from it, and his heart was bursting
with the strain. He had done his best. He could do no more. The bank
that seemed so near was yet out of reach. He had taken his last stroke.
No, one more, and now another. A third, and his feet struck bottom. He
staggered out and fell exhausted on the sand.

How long he lay thus he did not know. Aching from head to foot, shivering
with cold and with rattling teeth, he struggled to his feet. Somewhere
upstream lay his goal and he reeled toward it. Presently the walking
warmed him a little. He unslung the bundle from his shoulders and put on
the sodden uniform. Then he thrust his feet into the boots and went on.
Dawn was breaking when he stood at his captain’s door and heard the voice
of Kokan saying:

“That fool Kutami aroused the Russians and we could not go on. We just
barely got away. He spoiled it all, and probably was captured as well.”

Then he went in and reported, and when he finished, heard, like a voice
in a dream, his captain’s comment:

“That is the spirit of _Yamato Damashii_!” (the soul of old Japan).

He turned and went out, with Kokan staring after him in speechless
amazement.




[Illustration]




XIV


There followed a few days of grateful inactivity for Soichi. The surgeon
said he must rest and recover from the strain and exposure of his night’s
work, and he found it very pleasant to lie in his blankets and smoke and
receive the congratulations of his comrades. The story swept through the
regiment and every man knew what he had done.

Kokan was not so comfortable. He was suffering from a mental difference
with himself which urgently demanded adjustment. But pride stood in his
way. He knew he had been wrong and he hated to admit it. His accusing
self kept recalling to him the captain’s queer look that morning after
Kutami had gone, when he turned to Kokan and said:

“I am inclined to think you are mistaken about him, Lieutenant Kudo;”
then added, as if it were an afterthought, “it must have been someone
else who alarmed the Russians.”

“_Yamato Damashii_,” the captain had said to Kutami, and it was true.
He had acted with the spirit of the _Bushi_, the soldier knights of the
old feudal days. With the bitterness of deserved self-accusation Kokan
admitted the justice of Captain Minami’s judgment. He, the Samurai, had
failed, but Kutami, the Eta, had succeeded.

Soichi was lying on his back rereading O-Mitsu’s letter for the
thousandth time, although he knew it already by heart, when Kokan came
in without his sword. He sprang to his feet and saluted, then stood at
attention. But Kokan said:

“Sit down. I am not here as an officer. I came to talk a little with you.”

Surprised and curious Soichi obeyed, wondering what it could be. His
quarters-mates were all away and he and Kokan were alone. For some time
they sat silent, the lieutenant uncertain how to begin. He had had a
hard struggle with himself, but his sense of right had triumphed. The
last of the Kudos would not stain the family honor, kept spotless for so
many scores of years.

“I blamed you unjustly,” Kokan said bluntly at last. “It was not you who
aroused the Russians.”

“That is nothing,” replied the amazed Soichi, and bowed respectfully. “I
am only glad that your expedition was successful.”

He cherished no animosity toward Kokan now, and it distressed him to see
his lieutenant humbling himself in this manner. He had forgotten the
things that had passed and his mind was set wholly on the future. His
only hope was to die gloriously in action. But Kokan had made the plunge
and now he was going through.

“I have been unjust to you at other times,” he went on. “It is not
becoming the honor of an officer or a Samurai to act meanly, and I have
come here to express my regret.”

Soichi was genuinely pained. His ready sympathy understood how hard it
must be for the haughty Kokan thus to demean himself, and he responded
quickly:

“I beg you not to think of it, or to say such things. I want only to do
my duty, and you have helped me to that.”

“I?” exclaimed Kokan, surprised in his turn. “I helped you? Tell me how.”

“Please do not think me rude,” replied Soichi. “It is hard to explain
to you. You were born a Samurai and have an inheritance of honor to
maintain. It is natural to you. It comes without thought. It is merely to
live in the old way. I was born a Commoner, but the son of one who had
been despised as an outcast. The Emperor gave us citizenship. It is to
him we owe everything. To win honor is our first duty, for surely that
is what he meant when he promoted us. Honor lies in his service. To give
him true service, therefore, is all my wish, and if sometimes I have felt
that you—that someone was watching closely to catch me in failure, it
has helped me to be a better soldier, and perhaps brought me nearer to
winning honor.”

Kokan sat like one in a dream. This son of an Eta was telling him things
he had heard from his father and read in the books of the Samurai of
generations long agone. It was the old doctrine of the _Bushi_, but he
spoke it as if it were his own discovery.

“You talk like a Samurai,” he said, and rising abruptly, went away.

He had caught a glimpse of the soul of honor and it dazzled him. Here
was honor for honor’s sake. No other thought, no consideration of self,
no hope of reward, no seeking for gain of any sort, the simple effort
of a faithful heart to show in loyal, devoted service its gratitude for
a great gift. In comparison with the high standard of his life, the
teachings of his long line of soldier gentlemen, it was a thing of wonder
and amazement. Many hours he pondered it, and from his meditation rose
with a new resolve. The service of the Emperor had profited by that talk
with the Commoner.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spring was full-blown. The sun shone with summer warmth and fields and
meadows were clothed with green. The leaves hung thickly on the trees,
and masses of rhododendrons robed the slopes of the hills in pink.
Through all the army ran the whisper of coming action. In the afternoon
the men were in their quarters. In the evening, silently and swiftly they
moved out. They bivouacked for the night in the little pockets among the
low hills close to the water’s edge, and in the starlight ate cold rice
from their ration baskets. Then, rolled up in their blankets, they slept,
rifles by their sides.

The bark of a gun heralded the coming of the day, and the men rose to
see the battle joined. All day they lay in their hollows and heard the
hoarse, angry roaring of the guns and the vicious rush of shells, as if a
mighty wind beat through the tops of a forest of pines. Darkness fell and
the guns ceased their frightful clamor. Then came the order to move.

All night they toiled. As if by miracle they saw the pontoons thrown
across the rushing streams, and the lumbering guns swing forward. In the
soft sand of the islands they put their shoulders to the wheels the tired
horses could not turn, and on the cannon moved into their new positions.
The murky gray of early dawn found the Russian hills ringed in front with
Japanese steel. The day had come at last when Kutami Soichi was to meet
the test.

Fiercely through the lifting mist rang the challenge of the guns, and
over the heads of the Guards, lying far out on the sandy island,
screamed the deadly shells, searching the nooks and corners of the
Russian lines. Soichi was in the first line. Across his breast hung his
boxes of cartridges, and in the blue cloth tied over his shoulder were
his two little baskets of rice. His rifle, polished and cleaned with
arduous care, was ready.

For half an hour the shells flew over their heads, and then along the
line rang a single shrill blast of a whistle. Instantly they were on
their feet and surging ahead. One wild “_Banzai!_” rolled from their
throats and they settled to their work. Suddenly the silent trenches
along the hills leaped into life and the storm of Russian lead beat upon
them. Steadily they went forward, not a rifle making answer to the fierce
fire from the hilltops. Men went down, but only those stopped who could
not go on. Into the last of the three broad streams they plunged, and
under that unceasing sweep of bullets forged across. Then on the double
they sprang ahead, while above them still hurtled the venomous messengers
from their own guns. The earth shook with the concussion of the cannon,
and the beautiful day smiled on hill and river red with war. Fairly at
the foot of the Russian height they halted, and for a brief breathing
space stood still.

At the left of the line, where the Guards were to charge, the enemy held
the crest of the ridge with a double line of trenches terminating in a
square redoubt. There were the red-mouthed guns belching their hail of
iron death. In front, on the slopes, were fences and crisscrosses and
tangles of wire, winding in and about among traps and pits and jagged
stakes, and swept unceasingly by the murderous fire of the rifles and
machine guns in the trenches.

Three things Soichi knew no soldier should remember on the
battlefield—his home, his dear ones, and his own body. Calmly he surveyed
the terrible ground over which he was about to undertake the desperate
rush. Up there, on the heights, were the lines to which some of them must
go through to plant the flag of the Rising Sun, as the Emperor wished. He
wondered who would be the one to win that coveted honor. As for him, this
was the hour in which he was to die his “glorious death.”

Almost before he knew it the whistle shrilled again and they were off,
running steadily, in wide open lines, straight up the rugged hillside.
They cheered once at the start, a full-throated, rousing “_Banzai!
Banzai! Teikoku Banzai!_” but it took too much breath from the running,
and they stopped, that the work might not suffer.

Now as he raced along, the young soldier found himself curiously taking
note of things occurring around him. His right-hand man went down,
and Soichi, seeing him fall, knew that he was dead. There was one, he
thought, who had gained the prize of glory. It seemed strange that he,
too, was not hit. And there was Lieutenant Kudo, perhaps a pace ahead of
the line, running as hard as he could and somehow finding breath to shout
to the men. He marveled at it, and with mind bent on that wonder, ran
full into a tangled wire that stopped him with a jerk, almost throwing
him backward to the ground. It filled him with sudden surprised rage, and
he grasped the wire and tugged away at it as if to pull it away by main
strength.

All the time he heard the soft voices of the bullets flying close by his
head, the little half whisper like the cheep of tired chicks nestling at
dark under the protecting feathers of the mother hen. The wire would
not yield, though all along its length the men had laid hold as he had,
and were putting forth all their might. As he looked, Soichi saw a line
of his comrades who had fallen by the fence, struck down on the measured
range. He drew back his rifle and brought the sharp bayonet down on the
wire with a savage swing, all his weight in the blow. Clean to the ground
it went, through all the strands, and the way was open.

On he dashed, not even looking to see whether any followed. Blindly he
knew that Kokan was near him, still calling. He was so tired he could
hardly lift his feet, and yet he kept on running, running, always running
up that death-swept slope. Now the men knew the secret of the wires and
there was little delay. Soichi heard the machine guns rattle as he had
heard the typhoon rains beat on the iron roof of his father’s warehouse.
The Russian guns sent their shells shrieking over the slope and carrying
away his mates in groups. He saw men fall into the pits, stumble and
throw forward, crumple up and drop, go down all about him. Still the
prize was not his. He went on.

Then, without warning, the world came to its end. The whooping and
whistling, the shrieking and singing of shells and bullets ceased, and
with a far-off, muffled roar, the solid earth rose beneath him and hurled
him headlong forward, him and Kokan together. He wondered, curiously, as
he was in the air, if it were to be the trick of fate that he and the
lieutenant were to win death together. Then he fell, and for an instant
neither saw nor heard nor felt nor thought. A voice calling in tones he
knew, brought him back to himself and the riot and din of the horrible
maelstrom. He struggled to his feet to hear Kokan shouting to him:

“Come on, Kutami! Now show if you can fight!”

The quick blood leaped in him at the challenge and he sprang forward.
Over his shoulder, as he turned, he caught a glimpse of the great hole
where the mine had exploded, and beyond it, down the slope, he saw men
going back, Guardsmen, his own Guards! The horror and shame of it filled
him with rage, and he began to run again, on up the hill. Something was
the matter with his head, he did not know what, nor did he care. He and
Kokan were left, and if all the rest failed they two would go on. He
shouted in answer to the lieutenant’s call, and strove to overtake him.
With the sword of his fathers flashing over his head the Samurai boy ran,
shouted, staggered, went down. Of all the charge Soichi alone was left.

Yet he went on. The Russians in the trenches cheered him and held their
fire, too brave themselves to murder the brave. And, in the sudden hush
that fell on the awful day, Soichi heard Kokan calling again:

“Come here, Samurai! I am wounded! Take me back!”

Samurai! Kokan had called him Samurai! All in a daze Soichi obeyed,
thrust his arms under those of the wounded lieutenant, heaved him up on
his back and staggered slowly down the hill. He walked like one in a
dream, neither seeing nor caring where he stepped, and yet by miracle not
falling. And when some of the men in the trenches, more ruthless than the
others, fired again, he shifted Kokan in front of him lest he be thought
to shield himself by his burden.

He was halfway down when suddenly the trenches burst into flame once
more, and he saw his Guards coming back. The reserves were up! The
charge was renewed! Methodically he looked about him, found a pit,
carefully laid the wounded officer there out of danger, wheeled and
headed the new assault. Oh, how tired he was! How hard it was to keep his
legs from doubling under him! And yet he must! This was the day he was to
die a glorious death.

Back again by the mine-wrought hollow, the fresh men up with him now, and
some of them ahead. One he saw with the colors, the clear white banner
with its broad red sun. A bullet hit his rifle and struck it violently
from his hands. He paused, confused, and saw the color bearer pitch
forward on his face and the colors fall. A voice seemed to shout in his
ear:

“It is the Emperor’s wish!”

He sprang forward, grasped the staff and waved the flag over his head.
Under the awful fire the line was beginning to falter, but the flag
caught their eyes and a cheer rang up the hill behind him. He filled his
lungs and shouted “_Banzai!_” It was as if new strength came to him with
the call. He dashed on, reached the wall of the redoubt and scrambled
up, waving his banner and roaring “_Banzai!_”

[Illustration: “Banzai!”]

He saw his fellows swarming about him and knew they had won. Then
something struck him a terrible blow on the shoulder and he fell
unconscious on the rampart.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




XV


Lying on a board in the field hospital at the foot of the hill up which
he had charged, Soichi opened his eyes to see the slow sun dropping
behind the ridge across the river they had won. The long line of carts
and pack horses filing by, told him the victory was complete, the
transportation was coming up. His head and arm and shoulder were wrapped
with bandages, and when he turned slightly on his hard bed a sharp pain
warned him to lie still. A man in a long white apron, with his sleeves
rolled up and a red cross on his arm came toward him, and he recognized
the spectacled, kindly face of the surgeon. With a pleasant smile the
doctor looked him in the face and touched his wrist a moment.

“You’ll do now,” he said.

Then two men came with a stretcher and carried him to a soft bed of
blankets in a big white tent, and told him to go to sleep. It was very
comfortable in the warm bed, and he lay there quietly, trying to recall
the events of the day. After a little, he turned his head slowly and
stared into the eyes of the man in the next bed. It was Lieutenant Kudo.

“Oho,” said Kokan, and his eyes danced. “It’s you, is it, Samurai? They
say you won the charge.”

But because he was a good soldier and it was the order, Soichi calmly
closed his eyes and went to sleep.

Next morning stretcher men came again and carried Soichi and all his
tent mates into the town they had helped to capture the day before,
and there, in a fine, big room in a solid house, he found another bed
of blankets ready for him. Kokan was not with them; the officers had a
different hospital and there the Samurai boy was taken. Wrapped in his
soft blankets Soichi rested and dreamed and slept. One morning when the
surgeon came to see him he brought some officers of the staff, and one of
them, a grizzled colonel, with the star of a great decoration blazing on
his breast, spoke to him and asked his name. Soichi tried to stand up, as
was proper for a man answering an officer, but the colonel forbade him
and he lay still. Then the colonel said in a loud voice, so that all the
room could hear:

“The general sends his compliments to Kutami Soichi-san, first-class
private, and grants him a _kanjo_ for his extraordinarily gallant conduct
in the charge of the Guards and at the redoubt.”

Before Soichi could think, his wounded comrades were shouting “_Banzai!_”
the grizzled colonel joining with all his voice. For a moment he could
not speak. He was overwhelmed with the unexpected honor. A _kanjo_, that
certificate of merit and honorable service more dearly prized than life
itself. He had never dared to dream of winning that. The staff officers
saw his confusion and smiled in kindly encouragement, and the surgeon
beamed at him through the big spectacles. He lifted his head a little
and tried to reply to the colonel.

“It was only a little,” he said feebly; “nothing at all. I thought it was
the Emperor’s wish!”

He fell back on his blankets, and with flashing eyes the staff officers
saluted him and stalked out of the room.

“Ha!” said the colonel, as he mounted his horse, “there is a soldier!”

His comrades were miles away, daring the Russians to renewed conflict,
when Soichi had recovered enough to walk about a little and write to his
father.

“I had hoped to win a glorious death,” he said in his first letter, “as
was fitting for the first Kutami to be a soldier of the empire. But now I
have received this honorable _kanjo_ and I am happy to live and to come
back to see you and my mother again. I shall be quite well in a little
time, but my service is ended. The surgeon says my rifle arm will not
stand that work again, and a better man must take my place. I tried to do
my duty, but now it is finished.

“For one thing I am very glad. Kokan and I are friends. We are coming
home very soon, as soon as we can travel, but Kokan will return when
he is quite well. He calls me Samurai now, and says I ‘won it with the
redoubt.’ We have talked much about the old days and our homes, and even
about O-Mitsu. Perhaps if you send someone to ask Kudo-san for her now he
would not refuse.”

It was a different letter that Lieutenant Kudo sent to the house in
Timber Street. Himself he spared not at all, and in long detail told the
story of the midnight scout and described the day of battle.

“You do not know this Kutami,” he said. “He may have the name of an Eta,
but he has the heart of a thousand Samurai. He has taught me a great
lesson. O-Mitsu will be honored, and we too, if he still wishes to marry
her.”

When Jukichi read the letter he sat a long time in silence, but O-Mitsu
put her face in the cushion and wept for joy.

Two gray-haired men stood together on the landing watching the hospital
ship swing into her moorings. Together they stepped down to the launch
that puffed out into the bay, and as the steamer’s anchor rattled down,
together they stood up and shouted “_Banzai!_” Together Jukichi and
Chobei climbed the gangway to greet their soldier sons. That day the
Gentleman had accepted the Commoner’s proposal for his daughter, and in
the house in Timber Street a happy girl was awaiting the return of her
lover.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




XVI


The period of “Little Heat” had come and gone. Natsu-zemi and
Min-min-zemi boomed their deafening chorus in the pines about the Shinto
shrine and the rice was tall and straight in the myriad fields. The
_kitsunichi_ (lucky day) had come, and as evening fell, O-Mitsu waited in
her pure white robe the coming of the friends who were to bear her away
to her husband. Presently the little group set out, and in a few moments
the house in Azalea Street had received its new mistress.

When she had changed to the beautiful new dress of softest silk Soichi
had given her, she sat down with him and drank the _san-san ku-do_ that
made her his wife. Three times from each of the three cups she sipped the
sake and passed the cup to him. Then, husband and wife, they joined the
friends assembled in the wide rooms for the feast that crowned the day.
And among those guests none were more honored than Kudo Jukichi and his
son. The proud old Samurai had taken the last step, and become in fact as
well as in law, a citizen of the new Empire.

[Illustration]




WORKS OF ROBERT W. CHAMBERS.




IOLE


Colored inlay on the cover, decorative borders, headpieces, thumb-nail
sketches, and tail-pieces. Frontispiece and three full-page
illustrations. 12mo. Ornamental Cloth, $1.25.

Does anybody remember the opera of The Inca, and that heart-breaking
episode where the Court Undertaker, in a morbid desire to increase his
professional skill, deliberately accomplishes the destruction of his
middle-aged relatives in order to inter them for the sake of practice?

If I recollect, his dismal confession runs something like this:

    “It was in bleak November
    When I slew them, I remember,
    As I caught them unawares
    Drinking tea in rocking-chairs.”

And so he talked them to death, the subject being “What Really Is Art?”
Afterward he was sorry—

        “The squeak of a door,
        The creak of a floor,
    My horrors and fears enhance;
        And I wake with a scream
        As I hear in my dream
    The shrieks of my maiden aunts!”

Now it is a very dreadful thing to suggest that those highly respectable
pseudo-spinsters, the Sister Arts, supposedly cozily immune in their
polygamous chastity (for every suitor for favor is popularly expected to
be wedded to his particular art)—I repeat, it is very dreadful to suggest
that these impeccable old ladies are in danger of being talked to death.

But the talkers are talking and Art Nouveau rockers are rocking, and the
trousers of the prophet are patched with stained glass, and it is a day
of dinkiness and of thumbs.

Let us find comfort in the ancient proverb: “Art talked to death shall
rise again.” Let us also recollect that “Dinky is as dinky does;” that
“All is not Shaw that Bernards;” that “Better Yeates than Clever;” that
words are so inexpensive that there is no moral crime in robbing Henry to
pay James.

Firmly believing all this, abjuring all atom-pickers, slab furniture, and
woodchuck literature—save only the immortal verse:

    “And there the wooden-chuck doth tread;
        While from the oak trees’ tops
    The red, red squirrel on the head
        The frequent acorn drops.”

Abjuring, as I say, dinkiness in all its forms, we may still hope that
those cleanly and respectable spinsters, the Sister Arts, will continue
throughout the ages, rocking and drinking tea unterrified by the
million-tongued clamor in the back yard and below stairs, where thumb and
forefinger continue the question demanded by intellectual exhaustion:

“L’arr! Kesker say l’arr?”

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




WHERE LOVE CONQUERS.


The Reckoning.

By ROBERT W. CHAMBERS.

The author’s intention is to treat, in a series of four or five romances,
that part of the war for independence which particularly affected the
great landed families of northern New York, the Johnsons, represented
by Sir William, Sir John, Guy Johnson, and Colonel Claus; the notorious
Butlers, father and son, the Schuylers, Van Rensselaers, and others.

The first romance of the series, Cardigan, was followed by the second,
The Maid-at-Arms. The third, in order, is not completed. The fourth is
the present volume.

As Cardigan pretended to portray life on the baronial estate of Sir
William Johnson, the first uneasiness concerning the coming trouble,
the first discordant note struck in the harmonious councils of the
Long House, so, in The Maid-at-Arms, which followed in order, the
author attempted to paint a patroon family disturbed by the approaching
rumble of battle. That romance dealt with the first serious split in
the Iroquois Confederacy; it showed the Long House shattered though
not fallen; the demoralization and final flight of the great landed
families who remained loyal to the British Crown; and it struck the
key-note to the future attitude of the Iroquois toward the patriots of
the frontier—revenge for their losses at the battle of Oriskany—and ended
with the march of the militia and continental troops on Saratoga.

The third romance, as yet incomplete and unpublished, deals with the
war-path and those who followed it led by the landed gentry of Tryon
County; and ends with the first solid blow delivered at the Long House,
and the terrible punishment of the Great Confederacy.

The present romance, the fourth in chronological order, picks up the
thread at that point.

The author is not conscious of having taken any liberties with history in
preparing a framework of facts for a mantle of romance.

                                                      ROBERT W. CHAMBERS.

NEW YORK, _May 26, 1904_.

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AT THE EMPEROR'S WISH: A TALE OF THE
NEW JAPAN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
